
tessa_ransford


KASHMIR

You speak with me in dream  - eastern ascetic man
Commune with me whatever we seem to say
  When I ask you where you come from
     Turning you look at me telling "Kashmir".

High land of sapphires, walnut and mulberry
Whose lakes reflect the hills in their violet depths
  Glaciers melt to crystal rivers
     Kingfishers skim amid water lilies.

The Fisher King may dwell in the Shalimar
And we catch fire -  to selve and to bear the light
  Whose the face we each reflect?
     Jesus the one and the thousand thousand.

Kashmir afar I love and remember you
Fine wool, fine rice, fine silk such as dreamers find
  Once in life and ever long for
     Now I must rest in the bluebird's promise.



ENTWINED
 
Guardians of India, idealists yet surgeons
or engineers, my ancestors to six generations
spent lives, sweat, tears, wives and children.
Home was a word in the heart, almost strange.

My medical grandpa: the only surviving child from ten.
My own three siblings died. How precious I was
To my parents! My mother's passion the birds and trees,
bright flowers that bloomed in the dust tra la.

India and Scotland are entwined like a Kashmir shawl
round my life. The knot cannot be unravelled but
can uncoil like a snake, start up like the brain-
fever-bird that disturbs any chance of rest.



MODEL  SENTENCES

(poems inspired by some of the sentences for which the Urdu was learnt by heart 
as a model for tenses and modes of expression, when I first lived in Pakistan  in 
January 1960 as a Church of Scotland missionary's wife to work in women and 
children's welfare)


poem one

‘Ruth said, "Whither thou goest I shall go, and where thou lodgest I shall lodge'

I had been born in India
The man I loved in Scotland
would be a missionary
I had my doubts
about my religious doubts
not about the adventure of Pakistan

On reaching the ‘mission field'
I felt myself come home
but daily  had to prove
my credentials, as one who had
chosen the life for love of a man
rather than ‘love of God'


poem two

I'm very pleased to meet you
It's a long time since we've seen you 
Will you drink tea on the verandah?

hot  dusty  weary 
the house  the road  the work
but in the evening -
the garden gently cooling
and the hornbill watching from the sheesham trees -
all I ask is tea on the verandah 


poem three

This is well water.
This is rain water
Boil sufficient water for us to have tea and for me to wash my hair


water drawn from the Persian well -
the buffalo toiling round and round -
tastes of dark -  the land - the soil
the sweat  - the goodness of the ground

water collected from roof or garden -
from downpour - the clouds crack open in storm -
tastes of far-off snow ranges
sky -  trees -  redemption


poem four

I was about to come yesterday
but guests arrived so I couldn't

Guests expected, excitement
company, gossip, laughter -
forget the loneliness
forget the work
so much to tell to ask to share
so much to do
to provide for their every need

our guests are staying
days weeks on and on.
they make us poor
honour forbids we mention it
the guest is king of the castle

 

poem five

please don't mention this to anyone

but -
heat, dust
aching legs
throbbing head
children sick
no privacy
no light, no water
mosquitos, flies
ants, weevils
the stove smokes -
feel like weeping
no phone no friend 

the servant sees me:
"the other memsahib never cried
when things were much worse" -
then I cry and cry the more
"please don't mention this to anyone"-
he won't -
his pride and sense of honour
restores my own, a little 

the mali appears barefooted
silently with sweet peas.


poem six

If it is permitted may I say something?
Take all your stuff and leave

Take your bedding roll and go
with all that you have taken of ours
under cover of wanting to know about Jesus -
watches, money, coffee, my hurricane lamp

It's the lamp I miss the most

for me ‘it was a burning and shining light'
on dark nights when the child had a fever


poem seven

Please bring 2 anna stamped envelopes from the bazaar
I have to post these letters
What time does the post go?

What time does the post go? I need stamped envelopes
Whom shall I send to the bazaar on a bicycle?
Letters written ‘home' week by week and the answer
waited for week after week but we keep each other
alive as ourselves with this flow of words 
written in tears in tiredness
in happiness and longing:
‘I wish with all my heart 
you could see my adorable baby.'


poem eight

Does the watchman stay awake all night?
As far as I know he does

He may keep awake all night but he
certainly keeps me awake all night
coughing on the verandah and smoking
hash through a hookah - 
Would he be able to save me
from whatever it is that threatens?
Yes.  Remember how he came running 
wildly waving his arms and shouting ?
I had left the sleeping baby behind
when we set off in the mission car


poem nine

I was glad to cross the ocean and reach Pakistan
To hear psalms sung in Urdu to Punjabi tunes and the beat of the tabla
the honk honk of the machine which grinds the wheat

To watch sugar cane pulped and boiled in a huge iron cauldron 
on a kiln built out in the field
camels feeding under the trees near the village
buffalos being washed in the yard which surrounds each cleanly-swept mud-house

To see people with pitchers or loads on their heads, walking or cycling
palm and mango trees
clear starlit nights
but why does ‘god' allow the continual poverty and struggle?
I can't endure the babies dying and still they go on being born
how brave are the women, how kind, and they laugh  
someone has brought flowers from a walk in the cool dawn



Signs of March

This full moon shines indiscriminately
on Glasgow tonight and Edinburgh 

on Arabic and Persian poets, Albanian artist,
Rwandan lady whose own radiant visage

competes with the moon, on interpreters
translators, photographers and actors

and all who work to make things work together
for good, for wine and vine-leaves filled with rice

couscous with herbs, oatcakes 
and lemon cake, iced tea and water -

Our poetry addressed the moon as curved and carved
a barque to sail the inward skies of vision

but tonight there is an eclipse of the moon, for Earth
will come between and block the rays of sun

letting the moon blaze like a blood orange
in dark of night until the shadow passes -

Our poets and the translators have now dispersed
but their words are travelling who knows whither

with old and young from diverse countries around
our turning earth as they follow their destiny -

In full countenance or in passing shade
the  radiance floats on and comes to harbour 

Indian music concert in church in Edinburgh 2007
Lalgudi Gjr. Krishanan
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi
Somasundara Desigar

South Indian ragas played on violins
With mridangam, oval drum
O quench our thirst

Brother and sister sit for two hours
cross-legged, barefooted
flexible wrists and flying fingers
O melt our bones

Virtuoso improvisation
exchange of gifts in rhythm and sound
applause accepted with humility
O hear our prayer

‘The lesson endeth' for tonight
on our upright chairs in this reason-
worshipping, Scottish church
O restore our sense.



SWEET AND SAD

Children of India we chattered the lingo
water and dust plants and flowers 
as verandah players
insect crawlers bird callers
with kindly people smelling of spice who
would squat at our level or carry us
swaying barefooted and cool 

Children of India 
we ran in and out with our brown-limbed friends
sat beside them on charpai or durry
yes, the chapatis slapped together
nimbly the rice juice-laden fruits 
sugary tea coconut sweets

Born as survivors siblings who died
children of India we never went back
or home or where our lives began
or travelling back we were awkward and old 
language slippage friends dispersed
emerging as pictures fuzzy ghostly
held in the mind for generations  
in sepia light of all that was passed.

Children of India we never returned 
but nor did we lose that strange
intermingled scented colourful 
wearied drenched dried-out tested
born to die by-gone gone by
tears in smiles good bye, gone, good bye.



BURDEN

Elephants of polished teak, ivory tusks,
carved by Indian mistri cross-legged in the dust,
wrapped in his chadar and carried to the station,
spread out on the platform to catch the dulled eyes
of British families travelling in May
to the hills, or returning in September
after the Monsoon… a few annas thrown.

The craftsmanship is perfect and detailed:
one elephant pulls and the other pushes
a log of teak as big as themselves.
Mighty civil servants, the leader takes the strain
and the other puts his weight behind the task.
The white man's burden? Elephantine
to build and bridge, to heal and teach,
to manage and manufacture,
to transport and distribute.

Ships brought them to a bitter post-war Brtiain.
They settled as they could in villages and suburbs,
market towns and terraces, but on their mantelpieces
teak elephants were still and still and work.

Passed on to the children who had played with them
from house to house, the tusks now loose,
the burden was inherited along with carpets,
silver, jewelry.
			All I have is from the India
of my parents. Surrounded by it I live
far from it. Chained to the log I cannot move.




--------


moon_chung_hee


Morning Dew
 

During what profound meditations last night
has this morning dew been born translucent
on a blade of grass?
Was it agony? A drop of life -
starlight flesh and bones of sorrows.
Who could give birth to this round-shaped gem?
Is pain not soft and cold like morning dew? 
Love is -
a brief climax, a momentary precious droplet,
into which even the sound of a breath cannot penetrate.   
After the long journey through the night -
to bring what message to us
does this morning dew form on the leaves of grass,
precariously holding the transparent but transient moment?   



Putting On Makeup

Painting my lips scarlet
in the vain mirror stands a princess made up for all seasons .
my small face an arena of international capitals,
a place where fictitious dramas
staged by the manufacturers of cosmetic illusions converge,
a miniature territory where the flags of all nations lavishly flutter.  
Sexy brown is the color a la mode this fall.
Putting rouge on my cheeks, as Chanel instructs,
adhering to the myth of a glamorous woman, 
I see the conspiracy is almost complete.
Occasionally frightened by the slavery in my mind .
yet once again bewitched by the artificial perfume
that enchants, by the hallucination drawn in softly-toned colors .
my protest is only feeble and sporadic. 
To stop the winged chariots of time
does a body need to be adorned with such a sad fragrance?
With an Estee Lauder eye-liner
strenuously drawing a dark fence around her eyes
and with a drop of Christian Dior behind her ears
the colonized femme ÃÃante is now ready to sortie!
Like an actress in a tragedy, she makes her entrance slowly.



His Wife 

On the night of the fireworks display at the theater
I saw his wife.
Around her neck she wore a thin necklace
with tiny little gems, almost inconspicuous.
Perhaps it was a gift from her husband for her birthday,
or for commemorating the birth of their first baby,
or to reconcile after a quarrel, probably .
or for her taking care of her sick mother-in-law 
now fully well after lying in bed for so many years.  
As evening stars are embroidered on the seashells on the shore
I noticed on his wife the delicate, yet tenacious vestiges
of her husband .
those patterns slowly woven into her with the lapse of time,
into which no outsiders can possibly infiltrate. 
But I am just a stranger from a remote place
passing by.
Suppose I imagine an unexpected, romantic affair with her
what would possibly happen?
The moment I saw his wife
I realized our relationship would be inevitably reduced into 
a melodrama,
or a hopeless gust of infidelity.
That woman who was quietly standing behind him
who probably bought his suits .
was as inconspicuous as unnoticed cornerstones.
But that night, among the crowds,
I recognized her instantly.  


 
Song for Soldiers

Perhaps you wouldn't know
but all the women born in this land
once fell in love with a soldier. 
All young men in this land
once went to the DMZ in military uniform
bearing a gun against their brothers in the North
learning intense yearning and the bitter-sweet agonies of life.
All the women in this land
once wrote consolatory letters to soldiers when young,
went to visit them at an army camp when grown up.
But their love does not always ripen.
Often in the lapse of time their paths have crossed.
Years later, when women encounter
their old flame in civilian suits
in the sunset of their middle-aged life
on the road of no return,
they silently cry a little, shy and embarrassed
finding a rustier barrier than the DMZ blocking the path of life.
Perhaps you wouldn't know 
but all the women in this land
once fell in love with a soldier. 
 


The Boy 

The taxi I barely caught at the terminal was old and dirty.
Upset at something the taxi driver didn.t start up right away
when I uttered again, .Samsung-dong!.
Then violently tossing his burning cigarette butt outside the window
he stepped on the accelerator like mad
and began swearing to himself.
A former owner of a sea-food restaurant at Samsung-dong
he went bankrupt as the rent shot up double one day.
On the trembling hands of this hostile bullet-fast taxi driver
my life helplessly depended until I safely arrived at my destination.
Desperately trying to humor him
I appealed that we may be from the same hometown,
detecting a familiar accent in his local dialect.
He retorted he once dated a girl back home.
While pondering .would it be a satirical poem or a lyric. .
suddenly I saw a romantic boy in him.
One summer he suffered from unrequited love with a girl from Seoul.
For a shabby country boy she was too glamorous, too far away to reach.
Then one autumn day miraculously a letter arrived from her.
While not daring to open it, enthralled and overwhelmed,
one of his friends suddenly snatched it and threw it into the river.
While driving through the currents of city lights at night these days,
he still sees the boy in his mind
silently sobbing, hopelessly watching the torrent that gulped the letter.
At last I safely arrived at Samsung-dong and got off.
But the taxi driven by the boy seemed stuck there forever.   


 
A Valley

Amongst the thick woods of gray apartment buildings
a valley has just been opened.
Anyone who enters this urban cornucopia inside a huge mart
decorated with colorful banners
is greeted by a shopping cart.
Like well-tamed animals people follow the cart
that steers them past all the tempting show windows
before they finally reach the exit.
Like migratory birds,
people flock together piling up food in their trolleys.
Tricked by the word "credit"
they pick up the merchandise and throw them into their carts. 
They don.t have to pay now anyway.
Those who arrive at the cashier,
through the meandering aisles of commodities,
look like .friendly purchasing delegates.. 
Standing in line and proudly signing their credit card slips,
they look happy to be in this procession of consumers.
Like migratory birds flocking inside a net,
They rush to the new valley everyday in a crowd. 



To the Spider Poet

Spider, I am well aware
how desperately you embrace the empty space
with such immense vanity. 
Last night in a roar of thunder and lightning
the howling of thousands of wolves.
This morning in the green woods
those newly born green giants. 
In that wonderland
to hang a few drops of glamorous tears,
to engrave a dazzling rainbow in space.  
Oh my poet!
What resplendent silk threads you are weaving!
How busily you immerse your pen in the hot blood of your heart! 



Lies
 
Suppose I meet my old flame again
in a drinks place somewhere in South Seoul
and confess in a trembling voice,
"I've never forgotten you,"
would it be true?
We both know that it's a lie -
and yet, it's not quite untrue, either.
When we imbibe a few drinks
our past lives dissolve like a lie -
or like the truth.
When we come to realize
the transience of all the waves of words washed away
Then who are we -
A poet?

    

Letter from the Airport 

Please leave me alone for one year, my dear,
I'm on my sabbatical now from our marriage.
We've come all the way since we announced our wedding pledge
to stay together whether in sorrows or in pleasures
until death do us part. 
At an oasis in the desert, there we settled down,
deeply rooted and grew branches.
But please don't try to follow me for a year, my dear.
A soldier needs an absence of leave,
A worker needs a holiday.
As taciturn scholars go on sabbatical for replenishment,
I take my well earned leave now.
So please don't. try to find me for a whole year, my dear.
I'll be back after finding myself. 


 
Husband
 
Neither my father, nor my brother -
He's the man standing somewhere in between.
Someone who is closest - and yet so remote.
When I have insomnia from an affair
I am inclined to ask for his advice -
Oops! Everything but this!
So I silently turn away from him in bed.
Sometimes an archenemy,
other times the only man on earth
who loves my children so dearly.
So I prepare dinner for him again -
the man I have dined with so many times.
the man who taught me warring so often. 
 
 

Grinding Coffee Beans 

Still I love useless things -
songs and yearnings
wounds and raindrops
and autumn I love, Mother.
Still I write poems
while consuming more black coffee
than regular meals,
falling asleep with books in my arms.
I love wandering more than my job.
Still I love pine trees
standing in strong winds,
lonely stars and deserts,
wild storms.  
I know I could make money in wars and sewers.
Some of my friends have already left for a city
groping for money in the urban sewer
but yearning for a home-like place
where good-natured people
frocked like saints in white robes
though unable to read a single line of
the Bible or a Buddhist scripture
peacefully farm the fields.
Still I am plowing dry earth, Mother. 
Daffodil

 

No one knows

she who is floating in the air today as the tender soul of a feather  
sat in meditation on the roadside
full of dust last spring.
While trees straightened up their green spines on the ground.
While seaweed built glass castles under the water
she lamented, with her face on the ground,
listening to the sound of the dead people under the earth.
But like the highlanders who are rumored to leave home
to become a light being akin to a Buddha
when they reach a certain age,
one day she arose lightly on a late spring day
with a charming smile in her breath
leaving flowers and chairs.
When she ascended like the soul of a feather
standing with her knees deeply bent
her place on the ground was clean -
only some scattered earth, as the burial has just been done.
Looking around the grass -
no traces of her.   
 
 

Autumn of Man  

I am my own God on this autumn day. 
With all the words I have
I am the God of my own.
Autumn silently fell
between the stars, between you and me.
As the primordial sword of God
nicely cuts and chops,
everything glows in solitude.
Each and every autumn leaf
those free, solitary birds.
So hard to render those leaves and birds
into human language.
So hard to write a poem on this autumn day,
as hard as to move a mountain.
Being myself, I am already complete.
Birds, stars, flowers, leaves, mountains, clothes,
food, home, earth, blood, body, water, fire, dream, island
and you and I,
we are already poetry.
On this autumn day at last -
I am the God of my own. 



Appreciating My Hometown
 
I am grateful for my hometown.  
With all those trees
it taught me green.
With all those birds
it made me sing.
With all those rains
it made me shed tears, that fertilize all lives. 
I am grateful for my hometown. 
With all those rivers
it showed me flowing time.
With all those butterflies
it made me miss my beloved ones, far away.
And with all those roads
it made me a poet.  



When the Jewel Glitters on Your Finger

When you read this poem
you may forget the tears of the poet.
When the jewel glitters on your finger
you may forget the dark, parched skin
and the torn fingernails soiled by mud
of a woman wearing a torn rag,
washing for gold, with a shabby basket.   
Who has been to this realm of profound silence
composing poems, excavating tears?
How sad his confession was,
and how loud the thunder roared.
Whether the jewel may glitter breathlessly
you do not need to know. 
When a sudden fragrance is spread on the wind.
When a gorgeous poem looms in the mind.
When the jewel is glittering on the finger .
you may deign to forget the blooded tears of the poet.  
 
 

When I Want to Become a Donkey

Sometimes I want to become a donkey.
Sometimes I want to roam endlessly
even though it's not a moonlit night.
In the whirlwind of a sand storm,
whipping my own back,
stamping my foot on the ground,
I want to blink like a donkey. 
Why did our ancestors a thousand years ago
build this winding road instead of a straight one?
Carrying the pleasures and sorrows of life
in every nook and cranny of my body,
and savoring it little by little,
I want to be part of a caravan always on the move. 
Feeling the weight on my back
as precious as you,
I want to read it as a holy book. 
Each time I step on a protruding stone,
                              like the keen throbbing of my heart  
I want to knock on the ground profoundly.   


 
The Age of Success

What shall I do? I've become rich!
Abundant food in the fridge,
Tons of brand-new dresses in the closet -
happiness is ubiquitous!
Chinese cuisine delivered instantly by phone.
A comfy car carrying me everywhere -
Taking the wheel I could go anywhere.
At last, I've become successful!
When I quit poetry all my miseries will be gone.
When I buy a pearl necklace to wear everything will be okay.
No more twilights and green pastures in my heart.
No more tears clearer than morning dew.
No more solitude creeping secretly in like an alley cat
announcing the bankruptcy of poetry.
Shall I start the venture business of happiness?
Shall I dart like crazy - driving a powerful car
like a bomb at bullet speed into the dark city? 



Tale of a House
 
Women are born
with a palace of their own.
So they don't need to build a house on earth.
Only men build a house in this world.
Behold! Men bleeding all through their lives
carrying cement or bricks on their backs to build a house -
eternal construction workers
wearing a touch of everlasting pious grief.
Often they bear their lot amidst swearing and liquor bottles
strewn on the work site,
plotting to conspire and justify the equal distribution of wealth.
But those men whom we love spend their lives on the battlefield
building a barrack soon to be demolished.
They say that men often return to the palace,
to their birthplace to die.
History is full of inscrutable mysteries:
Imagine a species born with a palace in its body. 
No wonder women
have been constantly persecuted -
and invaded.



Song of Arrows
 
When I say this
I always cry a little -
In your lifetime you use words
more than fire and water, or even money.
So you need to gather words
and use them well.  
People compare words not to a sword
but to an arrow.
For like an arrow words never return once used.  
In the pointed, thick woods of arrows 
there's a heart pierced by an arrow of words
spreading poisons or fire.
When I find love with fresh new words
like the first chapter of a new-found scripture
I cry a little, my Adam's Apple trembling. 
I will use words more than fire and water and money.
For words are my most precious fortune.
When I say this
I always cry a little.



Encounter with a shrimp*
 
Not having the heart to cut it into pieces
I quietly put down the knife.
On a plane bound for Paris
the crescent-shaped shrimp on my meal tray
reminds me of my peninsula home.
Way up in the sky at an immense height
almost in the dreamy Milky Way
what predestined fate has brought us to meet -
a shellfish from the sea
and a human from the land?
Perhaps our encounter was prearranged
by some hidden threads of fate
silently weaving a dream from the clouds -
from your earnest yearning and my eager passion.
So instead of a knife and fork   
I pressed my soft, warm lips
on the naked pink body -
O my beloved Kyunwoo!*
 

 
* Translator's note: In a Korean folk tale a cow herder (kyonwoo) and a spinster (jiknyo) break the rule of forbidden love and, as a punishment, are only allowed to see each other on July 7 every year on a bridge in the Milky Way. If it rains on that day, which is very likely, Koreans believe that the couple weeps with joy. 



--------


iztok_osojnik


Postcard from the island of Hvar

To speak from a place from which silence speaks. Seven
of my hearts have put on Greek armour. They are running across 
the Kopais plain below the Kithairon of my imagination. How
catch dreams that have untied your hands? From letter to letter I open the shutters
on a tiny house that resembles a children's toy, a tiny house 
in a tiny house in which there is another tiny house, and one more, 
and it sings like the songs of Strniša.
To see and experience something for the first time, like a man counting pebbles. The shadows frighten me off. I shut down the computer and go
to the mall. I drive around town. In my left pocket a piece of folded paper, a super-conductor, a piece of the iron a man carries in his heart.
And drinks from, and eats from.Fog is something beautiful: 
for a man who doesn't sleep it washes his eyes, kisses his soul. 
The land inside is green. 
The sky green. 
Green sea. 
Green city. 
Green moonlight. 
Something green up to the sky.
Green earwig.
The sea undulates against morning, 
sadness glimmers in glass-like depths. 
The green boots on my feet run down there
amidst the cicadas and olive trees. At night I dive into a well and bring up 
some pebbles that kept my heart warm. 
Morning light feels out a face and shapes it into 
a delicate flower. I walk. The sky gently touches the rooftops. 
A green hippopotamus is swimming. Seagulls are screeching. 
If you touch me your knees will turn into creepers and break into flower. 
Water is as clean as honey.
Lavender nests on the soul's crossroads. Light is thinner than a rosemary twig. An endless field of lavender.
The smell of coffee.

(From the "Global Positioning System")
Translated by Ana Jelnikar, David and Teja Brooks



FATHER

You never said anything
and I never heard anything
but there is no doubt: 
the best in me
comes from
the twilight of your
silence. 
There glows the measure
for the deep end of memory,
for the inquiring looks from under the eyebrows,
for the rustle of woods on the steep dark  green slopes,
for the wild heights wrapped in fog
And farther still, like a shriek of a bird
that dashes out of a damp shadow for the sun,
for the slopes amid the grapes, tottering into wine
under the golden weight of autumn. 
Out of you grows the remembrance of the Tyrol cravings for the Mediterranean,
those tough green irons on the pyramids of the red granite over Bozen.
Or of the long, moist nights,
out of which dreams spread deep into the tissue
of another reality,
nights, out of which I awoke shaken,
sullen, subdued, 
a witness to prenatal states,
unable to communicate them well,
stammering and still wet from the true/real sobbing of my soul. 

Later though, imperceptibly almost, down
the valleys of dark green hips
and sharp rocks, slashed from the ice and the sun.  
You may have known it all,
of the chain of fathers and sons and how the accumulated experience
is passed into seed and from one soul to another.
Up the valley, along the river, the waves of 
world history penetrated, touching the cells' nuclei, marking them. 
The world is centerless. 
An ancestor, absorbed in thought, raised his eyes and
erected a chapel for a saint at the mouth of the river, 
into the ravine he built a sign
which people came to see from afar, wanting to learn of …

History ebbed and flowed like a flood, 
it named sons or daughters, leaving them indelibly marked. 
We all are marked,
with focused foreheads we all have written 
what we have not always understood. 
We have left graves behind, strewn with flint sand,
now ablaze with the shattered sun. 
We are motionless like a sparrow hawk on a twig. 
The gaze of the deceased harbored also our confidence and strength.
This presence, this measure, moves through the silence                   
                                                   like the deer in the dark,
across the invisible insight that resides differently and travels differently.
And not just you and I, everyone trembles awe-struck by these
vistas, by the spirit that winds through the valley,
vivid from the blossoming fruit trees, 
baroque like the royal carriage from Statenberg Castle 
                                                             that pulled up at the house,
dusky like the cloister and the park in the front,
where once, feeling anxious, you would wait
on your mother to return from the confession,
while in the vineyard cottage,
which was nationalized after the war together with the rest of 
the estate, dad was making wine awarded 
with the diploma that still hangs on the wall I am now looking at. 

From the Darkness in July
Translated by Ana Jelnikar



TRUTH

Mister Today pondered:
truth is irrelevant, what matters is what people think.

For example: father, dying opposite the room
in which there is a wheezing man 
who has by and large cooked up the Balkan butchery. 
(Stane Dolanc, an apparition reduced to gargling and a coma.)
I was at my father's side when he was lying at the neurological 
clinic (unworthy of that name). I was with him the moment 
he came out of a month's coma and looked at me with eyes full 
of vacant amazement. I was there also when he was forcibly 
transferred from the clinic to a hospital in Mengeš.
And also when we finally succeeded in getting him 
into the elderly people's home in Kolezija, where, twice today
already, he has gone to the other side among the unattainable
shadows. But a few times, when he was awake, I wasn't there. 
Father is now taking leave for ever, thinking
his eldest son has forgotten him.
An irretrievable and irreparable thought, finality as such,
no history can amend.

And the other way round? 
If truth matters and not what people think?
Where does that take us? There beyond the human world, 
where the primeval reality of the world rests?

Mister Today pondered, but received no answer.
An answer may come by itself.

A sequence from "MISTER TODAY"
Translated by Ana Jelnikar



EUROPEAN VILLAGE

At two in the morning the average European 
sends love letters to the stars 
over his village.
An old goat, upside down, bemoans the fact
he cannot master even more extravagance.
I am experimenting with myself, it occurs to Mister Today.
A black raven under the whiteness of a naked lightbulb.
Wingless fish fly around my head, seven thousand
fish of Swedenborg's from the topmost heavens over Notranjska.
One day someone will write an essay on this. What will he consider?
What is generic here? A distant train rumbling across 
the old Austro-Hungarian bridge near Prestranek?
How far is this from the supermarkets in America?
The yellow morning light in my computer's blue guitar,
a glass giant river gliding across my soul with the sky above the village,
but nothing bothers me, even if three times this size
the river will devour the sky and night
and my little fortune, occasionally no bigger than 
                                        a few lines of poetry,
which make my life quite decent,
happy inkpot.

Translated by Ana Jelnikar



Mister Today

Mister Today &#8212; an apt name &#8212; plucked 
a quill from his tail and began to write. 
Mister Today, have you had anything good to eat?
(He's just got back from the super-market.).
This stalwart boy has heard about Internet &#8212;
even he has come under the influence of post-technologies.. 
But he still had his quill and a wobbly tower 
of books under his arm. 
It was very late. We live in terrible times, he said. 
The obscurantist middle-ages started fifteen years ago.
Wars came over like bad weather and then lightning struck.
The result gutted was isolated nations and borders,
splashed over with huge amounts of money.
Life got more expensive. Prices went berserk. 
Zeno Today would be wearing a digital watch.
He'd divide the infinitude of an arrow's descent
into hundred of millions of a second.
He would never have thought days could fly by so fast.
Mister Today took another sip of beer and wiped his mouth. 
This joint's no longer what it was, he murmured. 
The beer's bad. And expensive.
By the way, the poetry they read here isn't much better either. 
As usual Mister Today said a bit too much. 
Mister Today who rides around the town on his bike. Mister 
Today up to now seemed like a Martian.
For in this country, everything has become really bizarre. 

Translated by Ana Jelnikar, and Frank Kazich



Press conference

Mister Today has wandered into a press conference.
They were launching selected poems of two world poets, 
one big and one not so big.
This is how it ends, he thought.
This is the meaning of poetry. To be launched
in a bookshop in a provincial town.
On a grey autumn day, 
waiting for a coffee
to be served
following the empty bullshit.

Translated by Ana Jelnikar



One Last More

Mister Today, somebody doubtlessly
you've grown tired of,
looked at the sky and said:
True, my world is big as the universe
above my village;
but, alas, the village itself is a good deal
smaller..

Translated by Ana Jelnikar, and Frank Kazich


--------


samuel_shimon


Maurice

"From the moment someone starts going to bars in the morning he's on the road to self-destruction," Maurice announced. "I have many friends who've become drifters and some who've even committed suicide, and they all used to frequent bars in the morning." 
It was a hot morning and we were walking down Rue de Seine. Suddenly Maurice stopped and pointed to a narrow street. 
"That's Rue Visconti," he said. "Lots of people think it's named after the Italian film director but it actually takes its name from the architect Visconti who designed Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides." 
As we reached the intersection of Rue de Seine and Rue de Buci, packed with people and stalls selling fruit and vegetables, Maurice commented: "Look, isn't this a marvellous scene that we're a part of? On the other hand, imagine if you were in a café right now, no doubt leaning against the bar under artificial lighting, you'd have nothing in front of you except the waiter and the boring sight of bottles carefully lined up behind him. Am I right?'
"You are, Maurice," I replied.
"What a person does in the morning determines his future." He went on: "Take me, for example. I start work every day in the afternoon, and so I exploit the hours of the morning practicing sport."
Listening to Maurice and nodding agreement, I noticed for the first time that smoking had ruined his teeth. At that moment I saw Marcello Mastroianni standing at one of the fruit stalls chatting with the young shopkeeper as she handed him a piece of fruit. He blew on it, put it in his mouth and ate it. I had seen the same sight many times.
"Look! It's Mastroianni," I said to Maurice. "Come on, let's go and say hello. I know him personally."
"Do you really?" He looked at me in amazement.
"Yes."
I made sure I was in front as we approached Mastroianni. "Bonjour, Monsieur," I said.
"Bonjour, Monsieur," he smiled back. "Ça va bien?' he asked. 
I nodded to show I was well, and said shyly: "Trés bien, merci Monsieur."
"Passez une bonne journée!" he said and continued on his way.
A few moments later, back on Rue de Seine we saw film director Marco Ferreri coming out of the Champion supermarket and I greeted him loudly: "Bonjour, Monsieur Ferreri."
Ferreri stopped for a moment and regarded me silently. Then all of a sudden he smiled as though remembering who I was. "Bonjour, Bonjour!" And continued on his way.
"You know them all," Maurice said.
"Well, I see them and they see me nearly every day."
Maurice coughed and spluttered for a few minutes, then said: "It's quite normal, I suppose. You're constantly on the streets, and if you live on the streets of Paris for years on end you'll come face to face even with God himself."
I had got to know Maurice two years earlier at the Café Au Chai de l'Abbaye. We both drank at the bar and had started chatting to one another. He had heard me talking about movies once and told me he worked as a technician for one of the French television channels. 
I told him I dreamed of making movies: "But at the moment I make do with watching them."
"Have you seen Midnight Cowboy," he inquired.
"Of course."
"And The Elephant Man?"
"Yes"
"That's the kind of movie I love," said Maurice.
"Have you seen Ironweed?" I asked.
"Is that the movie that begins with Jack Nicholson sleeping out in the street on a cold day and meeting his old friend Meryl Streep, who's also living as a tramp?"
"Yes."
"It's a very sad film," said Maurice. He took some gulps of his beer. "Yes, it is a very sad film."
"I love that type of movie," I told him.
That day Maurice said he was going out to buy some cigarettes. He insisted on buying some for me, too, and asked what brand I smoked.
"Camel non-filter," I said.
I was surprised when Maurice came back carrying two packets of Winston. He passed one to me, I took it and said nothing. A few days later we met by coincidence on Pont Neuf. It was afternoon. He pointed out a small garden below on the bank of the Seine.
"I spent my teenage years down there," he told me. "I used to play my guitar every day under that large tree." Before we came off the bridge he patted my shoulder and added: "One day I'll hold a picnic in that very place and invite all my friends and let them hear how I played Sixties music."
Throughout our meetings over those two years, whenever Maurice went to look for cigarettes he insisted on buying me some too. Each time he asked me the same question: "What brand do you smoke?'
"Camel non-filter," I would reply, and he used to go off to the tobacconist's and return a quarter of an hour later and hand me a packet of Winston. The last time this happened, which was about a week ago, I was determined to surprise him.
"I'm going for cigarettes. What brand do you smoke?' he asked, putting his empty glass on the bar top.
"Winston," I answered quickly.
He looked at me, quite taken aback: "Have you changed brands?" 
The following summer when I came back to Paris after spending a month at the Hamel campsite in Trouville I met Maurice propping up the bar in Le Conti and looking extremely sad. 
"Do you know," he said, "that when you're away from Paris sad things happen." He told me about Alain, who sold paintings in the street. "He committed suicide yesterday."
"How?'
"He gassed himself," said the kind-hearted Parisian, who could not know that next summer I would be lying on the grass at the L'Eau Vivre campsite in the village of Mougins, which looks out over the French Riviera, and that the campsite owner would tell me: "You're in luck, Monsieur. Right now, in the garden of the villa next door, right by your tent, Mr Clint Eastwood is playing golf with a French friend of his." 
That summer afternoon, too, I will feel in need of something to fire my chest and will head down the road leading to the market in search of a bottle of Jack Daniels. And what a surprise it will be when I meet Selina, an Armenian artist and the ex-wife of Maurice. She will tell me she has come to sell her paintings on the sidewalks of the Riviera and will add: "Oh! I forgot to tell you. Maurice has died. We scattered his ashes in the Seine, near Pont Neuf, as he requested." 
Afterwards I will take my Jack Daniels and lie down on the sandy beach until the sun goes down, repeating to myself: "You're right, Maurice. Sad things do happen when I'm away from Paris." 


The Death of my Father

That night I stayed in Uncle Salih's until two o'clock. I drank a lot and ate a nice couscous, and I cried a lot and wrote a poem to my father.

"Bonjour, Jean Valjean, Bonjour, Jean Valjean. He opened his eyes and felt only the pain of a monstrous hangover. The darkness of the early hours of the morning still lingered over the fifth arrondissement of Paris. He glanced at the doors of the Panthéon and saw a tall spectre with a thick beard enter and close the doors behind him. He had been too tired the night before to make his usual journey from Place de Panthéon, down the Rue de la Montagne Sainte-Geneviève, to Rue des Ecoles, to Rue du Cardinal Lemoine and after onto Quai de la Tournelle and Quai Saint-Bernard to end up at Austerlitz station where he slept most nights. He noticed a police car approaching the Panthéon and was immediately awake and leaning back against the cemetery railings, shuffling through his folder of papers: his pillow. He was fearful of the police as refugees like him were not permitted to sleep on the streets. The policemen glanced at him as they passed by in their car. He thanked the voice that had woken him from his sleep, "Bonjour, Jean Valjean", and said to himself: "Who else can take pity on the homeless at dawn but the enemy of the police, that giant Victor Hugo?' That early morning, as the leaves of autumn covered Boulevard Saint-Germain, he saw an empty cigarette packet. He kicked it with the toe of his trainer and the packet began to roll, getting bigger and bigger until it arrived at the Odéon very near the statue of Danton. By then the packet was the same size as the statue. He sliced into the wind with his hand and grabbed hold of an invisible staircase. He climbed to the top and when he opened the huge packet, he found his father asleep inside, smiling."


Umberto Eco's clown

Just as I went to look at Shamil's window, which was still dark, the one next to it lit up. "Dino," I said to myself. I looked up at the dark sky and hurried to ring Dino's doorbell.
"Who is it?" came a voice through the entry phone.
"Dino. It's me, the lost Iraqi," as he sometimes referred to me. 
"Ha ha ha, zzzzzzz." His laughter fused with the sound of the electric buzzer opening the outside door of the building. Dino, who was originally from Italy, worked as a bouncer at one of the nightclubs in Neuilly-sur-Seine and during the day he performed in some small Paris theatres – comedy sketches that he wrote himself and in which he played the role of clown. The year before he had told me that when he had performed his artistic clown acts at a festival in Krakow he was unexpectedly confronted in his dressing-room after the show by the famous writer Umberto Eco, who congratulated him and expressed admiration for his performance. Umberto Eco told him of his own passion for the art of the clown and said he was preparing a book on the subject based on the works of the film director Federico Fellini who was another person who admired the clown. Dino told me Umberto Eco had expressed a wish that they should meet in the future. 
"Did he speak to you in Italian?" I had asked at the time. "Of course. The whole thing was very friendly."
Dino welcomed me warmly and straight away said: "You can have a wash, if you like." I told him I had washed that morning in the washroom at Austerlitz station but he looked at me angrily: "You can come to me or Shamil any time." Then he started to pour a glass of wine. "You know I like you very much." After a silence: "I've come straight from Rome. Do you know who I was with?"
"Umberto Eco," I replied quickly.
"Exactly! Who told you?"
"I guessed. You told me the story of your encounter in Krakow, don't you remember?"
"You've got a good imagination and strong memory, you know. You don't need to be on the streets. You don't deserve all this suffering," Dino spoke passionately. "Are you hungry?" he asked.
I nodded an affirmative.
"I'll make you some spaghetti."
I had got to know Dino during my visits to Shamil, who would knock on Dino's door whenever he needed an onion or some garlic or bread. Also, if we were having a party we knocked on his door and invited him to join us. As the days passed we became friends. I recalled the first time I had been to Dino's place. It was in the afternoon and Dino was in the kitchen. "What do you do for a living, Dino?" I watched him take a small tomato. After he had hollowed it out he put it on the end of his nose. "This is what I do," he had said and smiled.
I devoured my spaghetti quickly. "You still have the same bad manners," Dino said. "Don't eat so fast." After we started talking about the theatre and cinema, about dreams and aspirations, Dino looked at me inquiringly. "You've been homeless for a long time," he said. "I'm sure this must cause you a great deal of suffering. Can you tell me how you deal with your pain?"
"I postpone it," I answered straight away. "Yes, I always try to postpone my pain to another time."
"How?"
"My dear Dino, I discovered at the very beginning that when a man finds himself lying in the street he has no option but to do as Sheherazade did. He must postpone the pain. The homeless guy has to be clever like Sheherazade in the Thousand and One Nights. He recounts his dreams and fantasies to take him away from concrete roads, public park benches, train stations, cold winter winds and his empty stomach, and then he will see the benches become feather beds and the cold winds blowing around him become warm and comforting." I looked at Dino. "And you, dear Dino? How do you deal with pain?" I asked.
"Pain is what drives a man to be a clown," he said softly.
Dino started making up a clean bed for me in the sitting-room. I watched him arrange the sheets and put on a new floral pillow-case. As I came out of the bathroom in the morning I found him waiting for me holding a wallet in his hand, like a mother getting her child ready to go to school. He had made me a sandwich and handed me fifty francs, a few metro tickets and up to thirty-three francs worth of food vouchers. When Dino saw me looking at the postcards hanging on the wall of the hallway, among which were a number I had sent him from the various cities I had visited, he laughed. "You know," he said, "François Mitterand sends postcards to his old friends from wherever he travels. He has kept up the habit since he was young." Then, just as I was leaving the apartment, he said: "You see, there is something in common between someone living in the street and the President of France!"



--------


arundhathi_subramaniam


Madras

I was neither born nor bred here.

But I know this city

                                     of casuarina and tart mango slices,
                                     gritty with salt and chilli 
                                     and the truant sands of the Marina,

the powdered grey jowls of film heroes,

                                     my mother's sari, hectic with moonlight,
                                     still crackling with the voltage 
                                     of an MD Ramanathan concert,

the flickering spice route of tamarind and onion
from Mylapore homes on summer evenings,

                                     the vast opera of the Bay of Bengal,
                                     flambéed with sun,

and a language as intimate as the taste
of sarsaparilla pickle, the recipe lost, 
the sour cadences as comforting
as home.

It's no use.
Cities ratify 
their connections with you
when you're looking the other way,

annexing you 
through summer holidays,
through osmotic memories 
of your father's glib 
lie to a kindergarten teacher
("My mother is the fair one"),

and the taste of coffee one day in Lucca
suddenly awakening an old prescription –
Peabury, Plantation A 
and fifty grams of chicory 
from the fragrant shop near the Kapaleeshwara temple.

City that creeps up on me
just when I'm about to affirm
world citizenship.



Home

Give me a home 
that isn't mine,
where I can slip in and out of rooms 
without a trace, 
never worrying 
about the plumbing,
the colour of the curtains,
the cacophony of books by the bedside.  

A home that I can wear lightly,
where the rooms aren't clogged
with yesterday's conversations,
where the self doesn't bloat
to fill in the crevices.

A home, like this body,
so alien when I try to belong,
so hospitable
when I decide I'm just visiting. 

From Where I Live, Allied Publishers, Mumbai, 2005



Winter, Delhi, 1997

My grandparents in January
on a garden swing
discuss old friends from Rangoon,
the parliamentary session, chrysanthemums,
an electricity bill.

In the shadows, I eavesdrop,
eighth grandchild, peripheral, half-forgotten,
enveloped carelessly
by the great winter shawl of their affection.

Our dissensions are ceremonial.
I growl obligingly
when he speaks of a Hindu nation,
he waves a dismissive hand
when I threaten romance with a Pakistani cricketer.

But there is more that connects us
than speech spiked with the tartness of old curd
that links me fleetingly to her,
and a blurry outline of nose 
that links me to him, 
and there is more that connects us
than their daughter who birthed me. 

I ask for no more.
Irreplaceable, I belong here
like I never will again,
my credentials never in question,
my tertiary nook in a gnarled family tree
non-negotiable.
   
And we both know
they will never need me
as much as I, them.
The inequality is comforting.

From On Cleaning Bookshelves, Allied Publishers, Mumbai, 2001



Tree

It takes a certain cussedness
to be a tree in this city,
a certain inflexible woodenness

to dig in your heels
and hold your own
amid lamp-posts sleek as mannequins
and buildings that hold sun and glass together 
with more will-power than cement, 

to continue that dated ritual,
re-issuing a tireless
maze of phalange and webbing,
perpetuating that third world profusion 
of outstretched hand,
each with its blaze of finger
and more finger -
so many ways of tasting neon,
so many ways of latticing a wind,
so many ways of being ancillary to the self
without resenting it.

From Where I Live, Allied Publishers, Mumbai, 2005



Return

After so long you will be here again
and I will have to relearn how it works

this dreaming playhouse of possibilities
choreographed by another accent
of weight and limb

clusters of clothes and paper morphed
into new jigsaws of habitation

and those startled collisions of memory
and reality at the sounds 

of a running tap, a muffled yawn, 
the clink and stumble of presence
in another room

and then the nights
when, turning over on the side, 
the arm reaches out 

and finds
with some primal riverine instinct
a familiar lost tributary of self.

From Where I Live, Allied Publishers, Mumbai, 2005



Another Way

To swing yourself
from moment to moment,
weave a clause
that leaves room 
for reminiscence and surprise,
that breathes,
welcomes commas,
dips and soars
through air-pockets of vowel,
lingers over the granularity of consonant,
never racing to the full-stop,
content sometimes
with the question mark,
even if it's the oldest one in the book.

To stand 
in the vast howling rain-gouged
openness of a page
asking the question
that has been asked before,
knowing the gale of a thousand libraries
will whip it into the dark.

To leave no footprints
in the warm alluvium,
no Dolby echoes 
to reverberate through prayer halls,
no epitaphs,
no saffron flags.

This was also a way
of keeping the faith.  

From Where I Live, Allied Publishers, Mumbai, 2005




--------


bejan_matur


WINDS HOWL THROUGH THE MANSIONS

When we were born
It was our mother 
Who had caskets made for us
And filled them with silver mirrors
Dark blue stones
And fabrics smuggled from Aleppo
Later
She would put us in those caskets
And whisper in our ears
Of roads
And winds
And mansions.
To stop us being lonely in the dark 
She would add our childhood too
To comfort us
With that childhood.
But when we were left
In the long river whose waters streamed
With blood that poured from ritual razor-slashes on our backs
Our mother never wanted such an outrage
And that is why
We kept telling the waters
While she was sleeping
We moved far away.

What's left from that flight
Everything, everyone is here.
I am here
My brothers and sisters are here with their loss
My mother with her dresses
My brother with his fear of war
My father's here, but not awake
Around me the world has shrunk
All like a dream
That hurts the longer it lasts

I

Our mother
Stroking her black velvet dress
And veiling her gaze with her hair
Would remember our father:

She said he was on a white mountain
A white mountain getting smaller every spring

II

When our brother
Older than all of us
And afraid of the distant war
Never came home
We too feared the war.
But it wasn't war that kept him away.
On his way back
He fell asleep with his horse
On the snowy mountain facing our father's

As our mother's face grew thinner
And our mother's shoulders shrank
We wondered which mountain to look at

III

On the long veranda of our house
As her velvet dress grew longer
Her silver hairband heavier
Her silver belt looser
Our mother looked more and more
Like the mountains she watched.
In spring her shell was wearing out
But we couldn't reach her.
She was dying
Pining away
She never appeared again on the veranda

IV

Lost every winter
Returning in spring
Our mother became a tree

A tattooed oak
Her moaning in our ears

V

Every night
In her black velvet dress
Our mother wandered among the mountains
She was a rootless oak
Silent, now and then weeping

Before we parted
We would gather in our mother's shadow
And whisper among ourselves
Please God forgive us
Spare our house
Don't touch our veranda
Only there can we laugh
Only there can we be really silent
Only there can we say what we like
And even if we don't touch her

We can see our mother from afar

VI

When the cold spell began
Horsemen came to take us away
Horsemen old and strange
Who made us afraid
Snow veiled their eyes.
Without a word
Not looking at our little hands
They came to carry us off to the mansions
Mansions howling with winds

VII

While our mother
Slept peacefully
Between our father and brother
We went far away with the old horsemen.
Our necks ached with looking round
Our eyes narrowed at every bend.
But in vain
We wept in vain
Our sickness was in vain
The horsemen had lost the way

We could never go back

VIII

We were like rocks rolling from the mountains.
We four sisters
In a valley of deepening shadow
Searched for the beds
No longer ours
Searched for days.
With every mountain we crossed
We were so far from each other
So alone with ourselves

IX

No beginning no end
No inside no outside
There we were
In the midst of that world of stone.
As our paths lengthened
Our mother's tattoos grew darker


X

We would all separate
Where the road split.
But who would be the first
The first to be afraid
Of the way
The night
And the old horseman.
We were in no order
We trembled at every parting of the ways.

I was the last
The narrow road stretched before me
Gathering strength from their grief
I was the traveller

XI

When I came to the first windswept mansion
I slept for days
Among copperpots and kilims.
I could have loved the wind
But for the doors and windows

XII

Ten years I spent with the wind
I was cold in every mansion
There's no sense in talking I said
If there can't be a human echo

I was like the silent mansions
With more and more doors

XIII

As the horses grew fewer the silver less
I moved from place to place
As I neared the south
I recognized the voice of the stars

XIV

At night
The lonely foolish moon
Resembled me
There was something strange in my laugh
I was growing up.
Sometimes I thought about love
Lord of the body.
Nights when I couldn't sleep
I smelt of earth

And on every journey I took
I ignored my tiredness
And daydreamed.
Once when the roads no longer scared me
There came a green-eyed man
Who made fun of poverty
As he grew older
His eyes grew darker.

XV

I had children by that green-eyed man
Two lads
One joined the army, the other had red hair.
And my daughter-in-law,
Slept every night by my red-haired son.
He was always cold
‘How warm your feet are'
He would say
As he pressed closer.
At thirteen the two children
Went to bed whispering together.
One night
Rain entered his sleep.
Leave me your hair
Leave me your hair
Said the rain
And cast a spell on my son in his sleep.
When I climbed the hill
Where he washed his hair with wind
The plain was under water.
Clouds clung to the earth.
I was waiting for a movement
A voice
From the waters hiding my son.
The villagers gathered behind me
With their flaming torches
Reminded me of the darkness.
I couldn't stay still
But went down to the steaming earth.
The mud grew deeper
I had no power against the dark.
I feared he'd be cold
And his hair dirty again.
When a voice said
‘He is dead'
My son felt cold no longer
He was quieter than rain.
My face streaked with mud and grief
I carried his body,
I carried his hair in my hands.
They put him facedown on the horse
As it climbed the hill
It was secretly shedding light.

XVI

In the bed abandoned by the green-eyed man
I grow old gazing at the ceiling.
Now
My skirts are as long as my mother's.
My hair longer
Than the red hair of my son.

Nothing lasted long
Journeys
Death
Mansions
Around me nothing remained
But pillars dark with soot

I must gather my strength for the last time
My hair must smell of henna
There must be apple-blossom in the ritual water
That washes my dead body.
And if God can hear me
I ask for a narrow grave
To make me forget
Those spacious mansions
And their howling



SONG OF THE FROGS

Every river mouth is a place for being blessed
a place for waiting
and resting there.

Every river mouth is a place for burying the happy,
for their return to water
and tasting the shadow of water.

In every valley at night
only the temple-bodies change
sunk in water.

The moment too short
like the past a dark abyss.



--------


gulzar


translated from Urdu by Pavan K Varma

BOOKS

They peer from the
Panes of locked cupboards,
They stare longingly
For months we do not meet
The evenings spent in their company
Are now passed at the computer screen.
They are so restless now, these books
They have taken to walking in their sleep
They stare, longingly

The values they stood for 
Whose ‘cells' never died out 
Those values are no more found in homes
The relationships they spoke of
Have all come undone today
A sigh escapes as I turn a page
The meanings of many words have fallen off
They appear like shriveled, leafless stumps
Where meaning will grow no more
Many traditions lie scattered 
Like the debris of earthen cups
Made obsolete by glass tumblers

Each turn of the page
Brought a new flavor on the tongue,	
Now a click of the finger
Floods the screen with images, layer upon layer
That bond with books that once was, is severed now
We used to sometimes lie with them on our chest
Or hold them in our lap
Or balance them on our knees,
Bowing our heads as in prayer
Of course, the world of knowledge is still there,
But what of
The pressed flowers and scented missives
Hidden between their pages,
And the love forged on the pretext
Of borrowing, dropping and picking up books together
What of them?
That, perhaps, shall no longer be!



GREEN MOMENTS

When tired of winging around
The white eagle descends
It speaks to the mountains
Of trees that once were.

There a tall deodhar had stood once
It would tie the clouds to its leaves
Like a turban
Or wrap them around like a shawl
Holding the breeze
Swaying, it would say,
If I was not rooted
I would waft away with you!

And there, a little ahead of the keekar
Was a sheesham
The two would fight a great deal
But the truth was that
The keekar was envious of the sheesham's height!
When the wind whistled through the leaves of the sheesham
The birds on its branches would imitate the sound

There was a mango tree too
For years a koel
Would alight on it as it flowered
Nearby were a few gulmohars, of which only one remains
It spends its time assuaging the pain
Of names gouged on its body

And here a neem tree, in love with the moonlight
Drunk with joy its leaves would turn blue

A little further away, on the next mountain,
A rustle of pines could be heard breathing deeply
But today not one can be seen on that mountain

I have not seen but it is said
That in the embrace of that valley lived a champa 
Larger in size than the big banyan tree
Lush, milk-white sap oozing from its cuts
The poor champa was taken away
From this jungle in so many parts

Sitting on a barren tree, the white eagle
Tells the mountains old stories
Of trees that once were.
Trees that stunted men felled
Cut into pieces, and burnt.



A DAY TO SPEND

Every day I am given a full day to spend
But every day someone snatches it away
Grabs it away from my grip

Sometimes it drops off from my purse
And I do not even hear it fall
Even a good day I forget thinking it was bad!

Then there are those who collar me and claim my day!
‘It is a debt owed by generations before you,
You must pay the instalments –

Others forcibly mortgage it saying:
Take a few moments to spend now
The rest we will credit to your remaining life
And settle accounts when required

I would love to have
A full day to myself, if only for once
And to spend that one full day with you
Is what I truly desire



--------


mimi_khalvati


Ghazal: It's Heartache

When you wake to jitters every day, it's heartache.
Ignore it, explore it, either way, it's heartache.

Youth's a map you can never refold,
from Yokohama to Hudson Bay, it's heartache.

Follow the piper, lost on the road,
whistle the tune that led him astray: it's heartache.

Stop at the roadside, name each flower,
the loveliness that will always stay: it's heartache.

Why do nightingales sing in the dark?
Ask the radif, it will only say ‘it's heartache'.

Let khalvati, ‘a quiet retreat',
close my ghazal and heal as it may its heartache.



Ghazal
after Hafez

However large earth's garden, mine's enough.
One rose and the shade of a vine's enough.

I don't want more wealth, I don't need more dross.
The grape has its bloom and it shines enough.

What can Paradise offer us beggars
and fools?  What ecstasy, when wine's enough?

Come and sit by the stream.  Rivers run dry
but to carry their song, a chine's enough.

Like the sun in bazaars, streaming in shafts,
any slant on the grand design's enough.

When you're here, my love, what more could I want?
Just mentioning love in a line's enough.

Heaven can wait.  To have found, heaven knows,
a bed and a roof so divine's enough.

I've no grounds for complaint.  As Hafez says,
isn't a ghazal that he signs enough?



On a Line from Foroogh Farrokhzad

It had rained that day.  It had primed a world 
with gold, pure gold, wheatfield, stubble and hill.
It had limned the hills as a painter would,
an amateur painter, but the hills were real.

It had painted a village lemon and straw,
all shadow and angles, cockerel, goats and sheep.
It had scattered their noises, bleats and blahs,
raising a cloud, a white dog chasing a jeep.

It had travelled through amber, ochre, dust
and dust the premise of everything gold, 
dust the promise of green.  Green there was
but in the face of a sun no leaf could shield.

It had rained that day.  It was previous,
previous as wind to seed.  O wild seed,
as these words proved:  ‘The wind will carry us'
– bad mara khohad bord – and it did.



Ghazal: The Candles of the Chestnut Treesl

I pictured them in the dark at night – 
				the candles of the chestnut trees.
Their name alone made them self-ignite – 
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

I pictured them in the pouring rain
as they really are, pink-tinged on white –
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

How many there are and each the same!
same shape and colour, angle, height –
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

Seen from below, most unseen,
they throw no shadow, cast no light –
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

I saw how distance matters more
than nearness, clearness, to see upright
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

Inspired by Christ the apple tree,
I looked for a figure to recite
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

Lacking faith, I could do no more
than find a refrain to underwrite
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

As May drew on, the more I saw,
the more they lost that first delight –
				the candles of the chestnut trees.

I've searched for sameness all my life
but Mimi, nothing's the same despite
				the candles of the chestnut trees.



Don't Ask me, Love, for that First Love
after Faiz Ahmed Faiz

Don't think I haven't changed.  Who said
absence makes the heart grow fonder?
Though I watch the sunset redden
every day, days don't grow longer.

There are many kinds of silence,
none more radiant than the sun's.
Sun is silent in our presence,
unlike love, silent when it's gone.

I thought that every spring was you,
every blossom, every bud;
that summer had little to do
but follow, singing in my blood.

How wrong I was.  What had summer
to do with sorrow in full spate?
Every rosebush, every flower
I passed, stood at a stranger's gate.

Weaving through our towns, centuries
of raw silk, brocade and velvet
have swilled the streets in blood.  Bodies,
ripe with sores in lanes and markets,

are paying with their lives.  But I
had little time for the world's wars,
love was war enough.  In your sky,
your eyes, were all my falling stars.

Don't ask me, though I wish you would
and I know you won't, for more tears.
Why build a dam at Sefid Rud
if not to water land for years?

Though we'll never see the olives,
ricefields, shelter in an alcove
from the sun, in our time, our lives
have more to answer to than love.		



Come Close

Come close the flower says and we come close,
close enough to lift, cup and smell the rose,
breathe in a perfume deep enough to find
language for it but, words having grown unkind,

think back instead to a time before we knew
what we know now.  When every word was true
and roses smelt divine.  What went wrong?
Long before the breath of a cradle song.

Some lives fall, some flower.  And some are granted
birthrights, a verandah, a sunken quadrant
of old rose trees, a fountain dry as ground
but still a fountain, in sense if not in sound.

Like a rose she slept in the morning sun.
Each vein a small blue river, each eyelash shone.



The above poems are taken from The Meanest Flower (Carcanet 2007), except for 
‘Don't Ask Me, Love for that First Love', from The Chine (Carcanet 2002)



--------


sudeep_sen


from New Writing 15 (London: Granta, 2007)

Mediterranen

     1

A bright red boat
Yellow capsicums

Blue fishing nets
Ochre fort walls

     2

Sahar's silk blouse
gold and sheer

Her dark black
kohl-lined lashes

     3

A street child's
brown fists

holding the rainbow
in his small grasp

    4

My lost memory
white and frozen

now melts colour
ready to refract



from Prayer Flag (Peepal Tree, 2003) and Rain (Mapin/Gallerie, 2005)

Offering

the kindness of libation, lyric, and blood

her endless notes left for me—
			little secrets, graces —
	trills recorded on blue and purple parchment
to be lipped, tasted, devoured—

only essence remains—
	its stickiness, its juice, its memory

seamless juxtaposition—
	the brute and the passion,
		dry of the bone and wet of the sea,
coarseness of the page and smooth of the nib's iridium

I try and trace a line, a very long line—

	the ink blots
		as this line's linear edges
dissolve and fray—

like capillary threads
	gone mad 
		twirling in the deep heat of the tropics—

threads unravelling,
	each sinew tense with the want of moisture
and the other's flesh

there are no endings here—
only beginnings—
			precious incipience— 

translucent drops of sweat
	perched precariously on her collar-bone
				waiting to slide,
roll unannounced into the gulleys 
that yearn to soak in the rain—

heart-beat shift 
the shape of globules
		as they alter their balance and colour,
changing their very point of gravity—

constantly deceiving the other

I stand, wanting—
	wanting more of the bone's dry edge,
the infinite blur of desire, 
					the dream,
	the wet, the salt, the ink, 
and			the underside of her skin



from The Lunar Visitations (New York, 1990) & Postmarked India: New & Selected Poems 
(HarperCollins, 1997) / also appears in Confronting Love: Poems (Penguin, 2005)

One Moonlit December Night

One moonlit December night
you came knocking at my door,
I took my time to open.
When I did,
there was just a silk scarf,
frayed, half-stuck in the latch.



from Postmarked India: New & Selected Poems (HarperCollins, 1997) / also appears in Norton 
world poetry anthology Language of a New Century (New York: W.W.Norton, 2008)

Flying Home

I meticulously stitch time through the embroidered sky,
  through its unpredictable lumps and hollows. I

am going home once again from another
  home, escaping the weave of reality into another

one, one that gently reminds and stalls
  to confirm: my body is the step-son of my soul.

But what talk of soul and skin
  in this day and age, such ephemeral things

that cross-weaves blood and breath
  into clotted zones of true escape.

What talk of flight time and flying
  when real flights of fancy are crying

to stay buoyant unpredictably in mid-air
  amid pain, peace, and belief: just like thin air

sketches, where another home is built 
  in free space vacuum, as another patchwork quilt 

is quietly wrapped around, gently, in memoriam.



from Lines of Desire (USA) / also appears in Indian Love Poems 
(New York: Knopf  / London: Everyman's Library, 2005)

Desire

Under the soft translucent linen,
  the ridges around your nipples 

harden at the thought of my tongue.
  You — lying inverted like the letter ‘c' —

arch yourself deliberately
  wanting the warm press of my lips,

it's wet to coat the skin
  that is bristling, burning,

breaking into sweats of desire —
  sweet juices of imagination.

But in fact, I haven't even touched 
  you. At least, not as yet.



from Postmarked India: New & Selected Poems (HarperCollins, 1997) / 
also appears in The London Magazine, Acumen, Wasafiri, Gentleman, 
Gallerie International, Inlaks Foundation Book, Findings of Ice, & others.

Bharatanatyam Dancer
for Leela Samson
	
Spaces in the electric air divide themselves
     in circular rhythms, as the slender 
grace of your arms and bell-tied ankles
   describe a geometric topography, real, cosmic,
   one that once reverberated continually in
a prescribed courtyard of an ancient temple

in South India. As your eyelids flit and flirt, and
     match the subtle abhinaya in a flutter
of eye-lashes, the pupils create an 
   unusual focus, sight only ciliary muscles 
   blessed and cloaked in celestial kaajal 
could possibly enact.

The raw brightness of kanjeevaram silk, of
     your breath, and the nobility of antique silver
adorns you and your dance, reminding us of
   the treasure chest that is only 
   half-exposed, disclosed just enough, barely —
for art in its purest form never reveals all.

Even after the arc lights have long faded,
     the audience, now invisible, have stayed over.
Here, I can still see your pirouettes, frozen 
   as time-lapse exposures, feel
   the murmuring shadow of an accompanist's 
intricate raga in this theatre of darkness, 

a darkness where oblique memories of my
     quiet Kalakshetra days filter,
matching your very own of another time,
   where darkness itself is sleeping light,
   light that merges, reshapes, and ignites,
dancing delicately in the half-light.

But it is this sacred darkness that endures,
     melting light with desire, desire that simmers
and sparks the radiance of your
   quiet femininity, as the female dancer 
   now illuminates everything visible: clear,
poetic, passionate, and ice-pure.

	
Note: The line-end rhyme-scheme — a b a c c a  ... d b d e e d ...  f b f g g f ..— maps and mirrors the actual classical dance step-pattern and beat — ta dhin ta thaye thaye ta. Also the left-hand margin indentations match the same scheme and form. 




from Postmarked India: New & Selected Poems (HarperCollins, 1997), and Prayer Flag (Peepal Tree, 2003).

SCATTERED PIECES OF A QUARREL

	We listen while a dustpan eats
	the scattered pieces of a quarrel.
			— Vern Rutsala

Every night, for many years now I hear voices next door 
through the thin of the wall, every core

of the crackling scream, like an old 
stylus needle on a scratched gramophone record, 

stuck. Every night it happens, shriller and fiercer
every night. At midnight, the ritual starts over:

the first conversations barely audible,
then the decibel levels, a plateau of maimed muffles

before taking off sharply, into the crystal
air of coded cries, on a steep delirious climb until 

breaking glass-ware scatter smithereens
as the soprano of anguish startles a bluebird in 

the nest outside, on the terracotta ledge 
of my alcove. Every morning when the sun's edge

clears the neighbour's roof, I sweep the apartment floor
trying to extricate rolls of dust from under the doors.

They somehow seem to huddle in fluffy balls
insulating the crevices between adjacent flats, the same wall

that simultaneously separates and shares, just like the array 
of dust coils clinging together, in fear of being swept away.



from Edinburgh Review (2007) and Postcards from Bangladesh 

Prayer Call: Heat

I wake cold, I who
Prospered through dreams of heat
Wake to their residue,
Sweat, and a clinging sheet.
—Thom Gunn, ‘The Man with Night Sweats'


Outside, "Allah-u-Akbar" 
   pierces the dawn air —
It is still dark. 

Inside, electric light 
   powers strength 
to my feverish body. 

Mosque minaret 
   radiate prayer-calls 
all around —

like coded signals 
   emanating 
from old radio 

transmitter-towers — 
   relaying the dangers 
of heat in this stale air.

   *

A bare body 
   sleeps peacefully 
beside me — 

her face's innocence, 
   and generous curve 
of her eye

lashes, try to sweep 
   away my 
skin's excess heat, 

one that is fast 
   making my bones 
pale and brittle.

   *

A brief lull 
   lingers outside. 
I cannot hear 

the heavy lyrics, 
   their rhymes 
trying to invoke 

peace and respect, 
   their wafting baritone 
instilling faith. 

Such things 
   are luxuries 
for me now.

I lie, trying 
   to piece together 
the eccentric song 

of my own 
   inadequate breathing. 
It is a struggle.

   *

It is also a mystery. 
   Mystery of a body's 
architecture, 

its vulnerability, 
   its efficient circulation —
they are perfect 

models I remember 
   from school's 
very early lessons.

They are only 
   how things ought to be, 
not how they are.

   *

Only now, I realise 
   the intent 
of prayer's persuasion,

its seductive expression. 
   I also value 
the presence and grace 

of the body that willingly 
   lies next to me, 
as her breath 

tries to realign my will's 
    magnetic imprint, and 
my heart's irregular beat. 

My vision is awash 
   with salt 
of her night-sweat. 

My hearing is trapped 
   within diaphragm's 
circuitous drone — 

in Arabic's passion 
   that etches 
its parabolic script, 

sung loud 
   so that no 
slant or serif 

can be erased, 
   altered 
or misunderstood.

   *

Religion's veil 
   and chiffon — 
its sheer black 

and translucence, 
   its own desire 
to give and want, 

its ambition 
   to control 
and preserve. 

Such songs 
   mean nothing 
to me 

if one's own 
   peace and privacy 
remain unprotected, 

or, are not at ease. 
   I want 
the chant's passion, 

its heat 
   to settle 
my restlessness. 

I want the song 
   to soothe 
my nerve-ends 

so that the pain 
   subsides
and faith's will 

enables to rise. 
   I also want 
the beauty 

of this faith 
   to raise 
its heat —

not body-heat — 
   but the heat 
of healing.

   *

But for now, 
   the diaphanous lull 
is a big boon. 

Here, I can calculate 
   the exact path 
of my body's 

blood-flow, 
   its unpredictable 
rise and fall 

of heat, and 
   the way it infects 
my imagination.

*

I step out 
   of the room's 
warm safety. 

I see 
   the morning light 
struggling 

to gather muscle
   to remove 
night's cataract.

   *

Again, 
   the mosques threaten 
to peel 

their well-intentioned 
   sounds —
to appease us all. 

But I see 
   only darkness, 
and admire it — 

I also admire 
   the dignity and gravity 
of heavy-water 

and its blood —
   its peculiar 
viscous fragility, 

its own struggle 
   to flow, 
sculpt and resuscitate.

   *

In quiet's privacy, 
   I find 
cold warmth 

in my skin's 
   permanent sweat, 
in its acrid edge, 

and in my own 
   god's 
prayer-call.



--------


amir_or


LANGUAGE  SAYS

Language says: before language
stands a language.  Language is traces
stained by over there.			
Language says: listen now.
You listen: here was					
	echo.

Take silence and try to be silent.
Take the words and try to speak:
beyond language, language is a wound
from which the world flows and flows.
Language says: is, is not, is, 
is not.  Language says: I.
Language says: come on, let's speak you,
let's handle you; come on, say
you've said –    
Translated from Hebrew by Fiona Sampson and the author

The Barbarians (Round Two)
It was not in vain that we awaited the barbarians,
it was not in vain that we gathered in the city square.
It was not in vain that our great ones donned their official robes
and rehearsed their speeches for the event.
It was not in vain that we smashed our temples
and erected new ones to their gods;
as proper we burnt our books
that have nothing in them for people like that.
As the prophesy foretold, the barbarians came
and took the keys to the city from the king's hand.
But when they came they donned the garments of the land,
and their customs were the customs of the state;
and when they commanded us in our own tongue
we no longer knew when
the barbarians had come to us.

Translated by Vivian Eden



A GLASS OF BEER

The perfect murder has no reasons, he said, 
the perfect murder needs only a perfect object,
as it was in Auschwitz.
Not the crematoria, of course, but as it was
afterwards, outside working hours.
And he fell silent
looking at the froth on the beer
and taking a sip.

The perfect murder is love, he said.
The perfect murder doesn't require anything perfect
except giving
as much as you can.
Even the memory of gripping the throat
is eternal. Even the howls that rocked my hand,
even the piss that fell like grace on cold flesh,
even the heel of the boot awakens another eternity,
even the silence,
he said,
looking at the froth.

True, a decent arbeit  macht frei, 
but a perfect murder doesn't spill
a drop,
like the lips of a child, he explained,
like sand and froth,
like you, 
listening,
sipping and listening

Translated from Hebrew by  Theo Dorgan, Tony Curtis, McDara Woods



SOME SAY

Some say life is continuing in the face of the alternative;  
some say - conquest; some stretch an equals sign	

between life and its absence; and some say that life
was given us to serve those       whose lives 

are not a life.  I say: you.
And this is easily explained: once again night envelops 

what can be seen.  At home lamps are lit.  And in the light there's no glance
except the one from the mirror, nothing except what sees me

seeing it; and it brings not release but longing, not death 	
but life.  And I take from this gaze the warm and the cold – night envelopes everything

and I long for the one who sees me through touching, 	
and I don't remember a thing.  Only this.

Translated from Hebrew by Helena Berg 



El AMOR BRUJO

How to say this?  You're too close to bear,
you are fruit bursting in the heart,
you are the name the dumb mouth bears
like sea in the earth's palm.
I touch, and envy my touching hand;
touching, I yearn to touch.

Terror of this motionless moment:
you are here inside here inside here.
Here the soul-fire burns, burns.
The heart unconsumed.

Translated from Hebrew by Fiona Sampson and the author



THE RIGHT VIEW

And if I would have portrayed for you 
this soft bluish light
the tremulous reflection of the poplar in the water
when a convoy of ducks is crossing the pond 
and beyond the circular shore line
the bushes and the bay and the green mountain
melting into the cloud-sky in the rain –

wouldn't you search my eyes       with a prying searchlight 
shoot a duck or two      down between the lines
and pray for the monster 	  to emerge from the sea
and gape open upon your flesh      a sky-high mouth
to redeem you 	
   from this divine dullness?

But there's no need. Here,     I'm sketching it for you – 
the beams and the nails 	  the convulsions  	   the pain
wave after wave 	  in his butterfly's wings –
your glowing faces		the landscape	
and finally          his wonderful cry 	
the pleasure-strike hitting      into your flesh    
the quivering thrill –

Just one more minute. Patience.       I'm almost      
finished.



A CORRECTION

for the sin of being spoiled with words and mistaking the call of Love; 
for turning away from myself like shadow from body, face from heart;
for the sin of ‘What will they say?'; for self denial; for pride;
for the sin of having followed the spell of praise under the stage lights;
for my ear that has abandoned listening, 
for the utterance of the mouth which I  have spoken, yet my soul has not;
for sin I've committed  against my own body with the rod and no kindness, beating 													my breast;	                
for calling Yours my own; 
for having  sinned before You by anxiety and vain fear, 
for having fed the fire of doubt from the log of the tree of plenty;
for having been dilatory in growing; 
for having shut my door and having neither heard nor seen nor let happiness enter me
when beholding Your being. 

Translated from Hebrew by Fiona Sampson and the author



--------


sarnath_banerjee














--------


tomaz_salamun


Acquedotto

I should've been born in Trieste in 1884
on the Acquedotto, but it didn't turn out that way.
I remember the three-storied reddish house,
the ground floor with its furnished living room,
my great-grandfather (my father)
nervously studying the stock market reports,
blowing cigar smoke and calculating quickly.
When I was already four months inside my great-
grandmother, there was a family council,
the result of which was the postponement
of my arrival for two generations.
The decision was written down, the sheet stuffed
into an envelope, sealed and sent to an archive in Vienna.
I remember traveling back toward the light
on my belly, and watching an old man
fussing as he measured the shelf, taking another body from the 
     shelf
and shoving it by the head down the air shaft.
I had the impression I was seven years old,
and that my substitute, my grandfather,
was a bit older, nine or ten.
I was composed. At the same time these events disturbed me.
I remember that for a time I withered,
most likely because of the strong light,
and then my lungs flattened like a bag.
When I reached the proper tonus I fell asleep.
I knew my body was down below,
and in my dream I saw it many times.
It was that of a slow-moving man with mustaches,
a dreamer and banker his whole life.

Translated by Charles Simic



Buy Yourself a Bike, Breton Guy, Buy Yourself a Bike!

Fays in the background are running short of linen.
Crumpled is also the eye of Pliny the Younger.
I live in leguminous plants as if in the castle.
I throw them away, not to burn my
bones.  Xanadu is brown up to the elbows.
Would you see it?  Would you interrogate it
if you saw it? The greatest hitchhike 
happens in the night while you sleep. 
Lord, they strip my back. They dole 
my skin among themselves, my upper-lip gets 
stronger. Always they use a clean clothes-pin,
especially for the story, asking me: after
your death will there be anybody to laugh?
Buy yourself a bike, Breton guy, buy yourself a bike!

Translated from Slovenian by Thomas Kane and the author



Cesta pomladi 

Imel sem sladka jetra. Obale do 
neba. In hupanje kamiona s 
Houston Street, mračnega.

Pleme je zrušilo torto.
Torta je zrušila seme.
Sol. Mušice. Grizem beli beli most.

Tvoje zaspano, usločeno mehko kolo.
Kot vitel, ki vleče čoln proti
zemlji, mi dviguješ, rušiš žile.

Naj steče vate, naj steče vate moj sladki sok.
Rabiš me. Če ne, me ne bi trgal. Ne bi
premikal svojega toplega

kruha, zavitega v krpe.
Sam zase si zbit, zame hrustaš.
Morje krvi ne vidi utripa svojega srca.

In prekanjen. Ampak ne veš kako
bogat. Nosi k svojemu ugrizu.
Troši. Peniš se, peniš se,

rdeča kri se razbija v bel slap.
O list mojega drevesa.
Beli ogenj moje bolečine.

Zagrabljen si,
o sin moj, zagrabljen si.
Odtekaš po poti od koder si prišel.



I Know

Last night, in the water where Barnett Newman's
line disappeared, I drowned. I swam
to the surface, like a black, dark-blue
luminous blossom. It's terrible to be
a flower. The world stopped.
Mute, like velvet, I opened, perhaps 
for good. 
Before, with Tomaž Brejc, we
talked about the mystique
of finance, about the eye, the triangle,
about God, possible readings
of chance, of Slovenian history and
destiny.
Don't touch me.
I'm the greatest capital just as I am.
I'm the water in which the
destiny of the world takes place for us.
I'm dizzy. I don't understand.
I know.
Tonight, when I made love, I
reported. I'm a black cube now,
like marble or granite-from-the-other-world,
a bird standing, with yellow
feet and an immense yellow beak, my black
feathers shining: now the eminent church
dignitary, that is:
they all wanted me, 
the blossom.
I'm the pure dark blossom
standing still on the surface.
Untouchable and untouched.
Terrifying.

Translated from the Slovenian by Christopher Merrill and the author



Jon

kako zahaja sonce?
kot sneg
kakšne barve je morje?
široko
jon si slan?
slan sem
jon si zastava?
zastava sem
vse kresnice počivajo

kakšni so kamni?
zeleni
kako se igrajo kužki?
kot mak
jon si riba?
riba sem
jon si morski ježek?
morski ježek sem
poslušaj kako šumi

jon je če teče srna skozi gozd
jon je če gledam goro kako diha
jon so vse hiše
slišiš kakšna mavrica?
kakšna je rosa?
spiš?



Jonah

how does the sun set?
like snow
what color is the sea?
large   
Jonah are you salty?
I'm salty
Jonah are you a flag?
I'm a flag
the fireflies rest now

what are stones like?
green
how do little dogs play?
like flowers
Jonah are you a fish?
I'm a fish
Jonah are you a sea urchin?
I'm a sea urchin
listen to the flow

Jonah is the roe running through the woods
Jonah is the mountain breathing
Jonah is all the houses
have you ever heard such a rainbow?
what is the dew like?
are you asleep?

Translated from the Slovenian by Elliott Anderson and the author
Published in The Four Questions of Melancholy White Pine Press, 1997, 1999, 2002, 2007, Buffalo, New York



Kupi si kolo, Bretonec, kupi si kolo!

Vilam v ozadju zmanjkuje 
perila. Sfiženo je tudi oko Plinija

mlajšega. V stročnicah živim kot v 
gradu. Mečem jih proč, da mi ne 

zasmodijo kosti. Xanadu je do 
komolcev rjav. Bi ga videli? Bi ga 

zaslišali, če bi ga videli? Največji 
štop se zgodi ponoči, ko spiš. 

Gospod, po hrbtu me slačijo, mojo
kožo si delijo, ustnica se mi krepi.

Uporabljajo vedno čisto ščipalko,
zlasti za zgodbo in me sprašujejo:

se bo po vaši smrti sploh kdo smejal?
Kupi si kolo, Bretonec, kupi si kolo!



Riba 

Jaz sem mesojedec, ampak rastlina.
Jaz sem Bog in človek v enem.
Jaz sem buba. Iz mene rase človeštvo.
Jaz imam čisto razlite možgane, kot
cvet, da lahko bolj ljubim. Včasih dam
prste vanje in so topli. Hudobni ljudje
rečejo, da se drugi ljudje v njih
utopijo. Ne. Jaz sem trebuh.
V njem sprejemam popotnike.
Jaz imam ženo, ki me ljubi.
Včasih se ustrašim, da me ona bolj
ljubi kot jaz njo in sem žalosten in
potrt. Moja žena diha kot majhen
ptiček. Njeno telo me spočije.
Moja žena se boji drugih gostov.
Rečem ji ne, ne, ne se bati.
Vsi gosti so en sam in za nas vse.
Bela vžigalica z modro glavico mi je
padla v stroj. Umazal sem si nohte.
Zdaj premišljujem, kaj naj napišem.
Tukaj živi ena soseda. Njeni otroci zelo
razgrajajo. Jaz sem Bog in jih pomirim.
Ob enih grem k zobozdravniku. Dr. Mena,
calle Reloj. Pozvonil bom in rekel, naj mi
izdre zob, ker preveč trpim.
Najbolj sem srečen v spanju in ko pišem.
Mojstri si me podajajo iz roke v roko.
To je potrebno. To je tako potrebno
kot za drevo, da rase. Drevo rabi zemljo.
Jaz rabim zemljo, da ne znorim.
Živel bom štiristo petdeset let.
Rezabar Tarzs živi že šesto let.
Ne vem, če je bil on v tistem belem plašču,
ker jih še ne ločim. Ko pišem, imam
drugo posteljo. Včasih se razlijem bolj kot
voda, ker voda najbolj ljubi.
Strah rani ljudi. Roža je najbolj
mehka, če daš nanjo dlan. Roža ima rada
dlan. Jaz imam rad vse. Včeraj sem 
sanjal, da se je moj oče sklonil k
Harriet. Ustrašim se drugih žensk in
zato z njimi ne spim. Ampak razdalja med
Bogom in mladimi ljudmi je majhna.
V Bogu je vedno ena sama ženska, in to je
moja žena. Ne bojim se, da bi me gostje
raztrgali. Jaz lahko dam vse, pa še zrase.
Bolj ko dajem, bolj rase. Potem odplava
kot pomoč za druga bitja. Na enem planetu je
zbirni center za moje meso. Ne vem na
katerem. Kdorkoli bo spil kaj od tega, bo
srečen. Jaz sem cevka. Jaz sem Bog, ker
ljubim. Vse temno imam tu, not, nič
zunaj. Vsako žival lahko presvetlim.
Kruli mi. Kadar slišim sokove v svojem
telesu, vem, da sem v milosti. Jaz bi moral
noč in dan požirati denar, če bi hotel
zgraditi svoje življenje, pa še ne bi
pomagalo. Jaz sem ustvarjen za to, da
sijem. Denar je smrt. Na teraso grem.
Od tam vidim vso pokrajino, do Dolores
Hidalga. Toplo in mehko je kot v Toskani,
pa ni Toskana. Tam z Metko sediva in
gledava. Sonce zaide in še sediva in
gledava. Ona ima roke kot šakti. Jaz imam
gobec kot egipčanska žival. Ljubezen je
vse. Mojzesova košara se ni nikoli
razbila na skalah. Iz ravne pokrajine
hodijo majhni konjički. Od Sierre piha
veter. Jaz grem ljudem v usta z glavo
naprej in jih ubijem in rodim,
ubijem in rodim, ker pišem.



Spring Street

I had a sweet liver. Coasts to the sky.
Honking of the truck on Houston street,
the dark one.

The tribe demolished the layer cake.
The layer cake destroyed the seed.
Salt. Midgets. I bite your white white bridge.

Your sleepy, softly turning wheel.
As a winch pulling a boat to earth, 
you lift, you wreck my veins.

Let it flow into you, let it flow into you, my sweet juice.
You need me. If not, you wouldn't tear me apart.
You wouldn't move your warm 

bread, wrapped in rags.
For you yourself are pinned together, for me you crunch.
The sea of blood is not aware of the heat of your heart.

And cunning. But you don't know how
rich. Carried toward your bite-mark.
Spend. You froth, you froth,

red blood breaks into a waterfall.
O leaf of my tree,
white fire of my grief.

You are seized, my son, you are seized.
You flow away on the path 
from which you came.              

Translated from the Slovenian by Joshua Beckman and the author


          
The Fish

I am a carnivore, but a plant.
I am God and man in one.
I'm a chrysalis. Mankind grows out of me.
My brain is liquefied like
a flower, so I can love better. Sometimes I dip
my fingers in it and it's warm. Nasty people
say others have drowned
in it. Not true. I am a belly.
I put up travelers in it.
I have a wife who loves me.
Sometimes I'm afraid she loves me
more than I love her and I get sad and
depressed. My wife breathes like a small
bird. Her body soothes me.
My wife is afraid of other guests.
I say to her, now, now, don't be afraid.
All our guests are a single being, for both of us.
A white match with a blue head has fallen into my
typewriter. My nails are all dirty. 
I'm thinking hard now what to write.
One of my neighbors has terribly noisy 
children. I am God, I calm them down.
At one I'm going to the dentist, Dr. Mena, 
Calle Reloj. I'll ring the bell and ask him
to pull my tooth, because it hurts too much.
I'm happiest in my sleep and when I write.
The masters pass me along from hand to hand.
That's essential. It's just as essential as
growing is for trees. A tree needs earth.
I need earth so I won't go mad.
I'll live four hundred and fifty years.
Tarzs Rebazar has been alive six hundred.
I don't know if that was him in the white coat,
I still can't make them out. When I write I have
a different bed. Sometimes I start pouring out more like
water, because water is most loving of all.
Fear injures people. A flower is softest
if you close your hand around it. Flowers like 
hands. I like everything. Last night I
dreamed my father leaned across toward
Harriet. Other women frighten me, and 
so I don't sleep with them. But the distance between
God and young people is slight.
There's always just a single woman in God, and that's
my wife. I'm not afraid of my guests tearing 
me apart. I can give them anything, it will just grow back.
The more I give, the more it grows back. Then it launches off
as a source of help for other creatures. On some planet
there's a central storehouse for my flesh. I don't know
which one it's on. Whoever drinks it will 
be happy. I'm a water hose. I'm God because
I love. Everything dark in here, inside, nothing
outside. I can X-ray any creature.
I'm rumbling. When I hear the juices in my
body, I know I'm in a state of grace. I would have to
consume money day and night if I wanted to
build a life, and still it wouldn't help. I was made to
shine. Money is death. I'll go out on the terrace.
From there I can see the whole countryside as far as Dolores
Hidalgo. It's warm and soft as Tuscany,
though is not Tuscany. Metka and I sit there,
watching. Her hands are like Shakti's. My
mouth is like some Egyptian beast's. Love is
all. Moses's wicker basket never
struck the rocks. Miniature horses come
trotting out of the level countryside. A wind blows
from the Sierras. I slide headfirst into people's
mouths and kill and give birth,
kill and give birth, because I write.

Translated from the Slovenian by Michael Biggins



Vem

Včeraj zvečer me je tam, kjer je
poniknila črta Barnetta Newmana,
potopilo v vodo. Na gladino sem 
priplaval kot črn, temno moder
svetleč cvet. Strašno je biti
roža. Svet je obstal. Nemo sem se
odprl, žametno, verjetno
dokončno. S Tomažem Brejcem sva se 
pred tem pogovarjala o mistiki
finančne mase, o očesu, o trikotniku, 
o Bogu. O možnosti branj, o 
šansi, o slovenski zgodovini in 
usodi.
Ne dotikajte se me.
Tak kot sem, sem največji kapital.
Jaz sem voda, ki se v njej
usoda sveta dogaja za nas.
Omotičen sem. Ničesar ne razumem.
Vem.
Ponoči, ko sem ljubil, sem
poročal. Zdaj sem črn kubus, podoben
marmorju ali granitu z drugega sveta,
ptič, ki stoji z rumenimi nogami,
z ogromnim rumenim kljunim, ki se mi
črno perje blešči, zdaj visoki 
cerkveni dostojanstvenik, to je:
vsi so hoteli navaliti name, na 
cvet.
Čist temen cvet sem, ki
miruje na gladini.
Nedotakljiv in nedotaknjen.
Strašen.



--------


neshe_yashin


The Pendulum of Love

You divided me
breaking up as I bled in the middle of the night
the bridges of my inner city collapsed
Eleni was a paper woman
a speck of paint, a little sadness
and the simple story of womanhood,

You were a pendulum of love
touching her touching me
then you stopped at her
- the choice of defeat
whereas spell was in motion -

You came and went
to her to me
hurting with each touch

You divided me
you stabbed me with your pain like a knife
then you mourned my death

I am looking at your eyes
to what far away land have they gone
you the drop of love flowing to me
it is finished you say
then let barbed wire fall in between

I am looking at your empty space
the aching echo of your orphaned love
there is never a winner in this war
Eleni a ruin worse than I

To love?
I have also loved many man
and still do
the miracle is elsewhere
the city beyond loving
the night I have found you
inside inside me

Talking of separation
I suddenly realise
how deep your presence
how crowded the city
how tight this knot

As I sighed
fires began in every cell
I remembered I did have a past
I remembered I am in a world
in the night as naked inner pain

Now I think everything is a lie
a divided city
still reaches itself

I am asleep in my grave
you throw handfuls of betrayals on me
I am waiting for that moment to arrive
and everything to change
for your arms to embrace me
and everything is a game, you see
forgive me my love forgive me

The city awakes
and everything flows as it should be
cars and the tomorrow of life to be continued
I wake into insanity
and look at the time you have vacated
to the hurtful words dangling in mid-air

Who cares
what is being lived in this house, at this moment
I have raked the years
and the sky is bleeding
I am looking for the music I have lost
in our body

Love is fiction
that's what they will say
everyone can talk, and this is on everyone's head
yet how strange
I am dying alone with the poison I have tasted.
a rare flower withers by my side

I am waiting
as though everything will change,
"Forgive me my love forgive me
in this world I have chosen you
paying the price in disgrace."

How far how distant was that look
the wall of bloody wars in front of your eyes
How very true were your words
I was just like other women
as my soul crushed into your eyes
as it tore apart
as my skin ached

I hear the thunder
of those unyielding words
I am not a beetle to be destroyed
inside I am so vast so deep

How strange
the purification of oneself
with the violence of sorrow
am I so innocent, maybe not
who knows how I must have hurt you
for you to crush me and walk away like this

translated by AYDIN MEHMET ALI



Stark naked

Your poem a secretive mirror
where I saw myself with joy
from the shadow of a body
I walked to wonderlands
magical the power of your love

Howling winds, Howling winds, Howling winds
destroyed the tower I am locked in

A woman
firmly always holds 
dresses in love as she undresses

If you come ringing bells
I think you a snake
since torturers
stole the love from my body

Don't kiss me
your poisoned tongue my suicide
don't talk of me
in your voice the revenge of sorrows

What a crazy dance 
a love without gravity
losing itself in space 

A flower 
left on my table
a star fell asleep on the sheet
hang its voice on my breast
beating there
doors knocking
the tick-tack of the clock
holding my hand
your breath asleep in mine

(The rainbow flowed mud
as the arrow of separation sprang)

Leaving the mirror
an old woman's wrinkles under my eyes
I stripped love from my body
became stark naked
destitute, silent

be quiet 
no poet on earth can find
the lines to forgive you

From the book, Kapilar (Doors), 1992
translated by AYDIN MEHMET ALI



Unsent Letters 

You took your voice and left
and I remained staring at your empty space
your footprints did not disappear
on the roads of loving

Glaring loneliness is what you left
even when you dais "you are not alone"

I have yet to grow up I am a lovebabe
my dreams those of an adolescent girl
I will come barefoot as everyone sleeps

In the same city
walls cut across my path
wait on the other side to run and embrace
since love is a bird

And you?

How can  a man love
overcoming all obligations
would he come head-over-heels in love

There is no access
even if you begin the journey
(Impossible without orders from the Commander)

I was going to say don't love a poet
your fire silenced me
love is a national traitor

If I were to reach you
are you there?
On an island in the Mediterranean Sea

Love would emerge if you were to divide love
I don't want it even independent federal

In two separate cells
to  love in silence
(This is a betrayal
of the rebel generation)


II

Your name
is like a knot inside me
I undo it
the soul pain and love seizures increase
if loving is not joyful
what's the use?
I must submit a petition
(My request is obvious)
"Permission to cross the border to be granted due to longing."
A lovesick flower
is dying
the guns turn on it
- Love has been detained in no-man's land
it confessed to being a lunatic escapee

III

Even if I know nothing
I know everything
Love is the God of non-recognition of borders
I saw you in my dream
a bitter taste, confusion
you had said you were ill, I did not forget
even if around you always women
die in me if you die
don't die
I die

IV

I am afraid
that this forbidden hope might be extinguished
it is inescapable for fire to become ash
I am mad I might just get up and come

And you?

Thief-of-hearts
thief-of-women's-hearts-bird

And should you set me free
where shall I go?

Who shall understand my language
the love of a provincial girl

And if you were to fly away
what would I do?

I am afraid
You did not notice.


V

I only write poetry
if love exists, it can only be as poetry
it can only be crazy
overflowing uncontrollably, becoming the wind
if you can be, you are the one
only you become me

VI

In a musty cell
I am a tangled up ball of wool
This is not Berlin
Don't expect me

I too expect you not to expect me

If they were to shoot us
what would remain

If anything was to be shot love would be
craziness in itself

If only the address of the two of us was the same.

VII

Today is my day without hope
no force can unite the United Nations
as long as Nations exist

I want peace
between woman and man

Can you not even fly me a message?
to love like a woman is the implication in the end



VIII

I am alone
I am so much you that I am so alone
so much a child
so much a woman
so much a poet

I am a flower, I have closed up
my joy only opens to you
I am alone.

IX

If they were to divide you by me
me by you
we remain in the end

I sit and write poetry
continue to burn by your side

If only I were your side
and you were my side

United we would become us

X

No permission to cross
in reality it is the traces of hope which disappear
days spent in longing have turned to grief
Don't wait for me
in the other cell of sorrow

No access to love
(Our Army is our greatest security)
I kept looking at the stars tonight
hoping you were looking too

Your message for a meeting has reached me
in a different country
at a different time

But I can't wait
the yellow snake called time
keeps writhing inside me

I have fallen into unpostponable longings
I must see you today

I will tell everyone I am in love with you
even the policeman at the check-point
I will tell everyone your forbidden name

I will then walk through
dressed like a cat

Wait for me
take me in your arms
I will say "miow" to you in Turkish.

XI

To touch you
first I need paper and pen
then hope
then tears

How can I touch you?

Climb up tall buildings
and look towards me
you will see that I love you
nothing else
(This love is an historical error)

XII
History buy me a Berlin
I want to take him in my arms
to run and run
to find him amongst the crowds
with hundred degree love
to return to each other

Add me to him, him to me
History buy me a Berlin.


XIII

My homeland
I felt you deepest in this love
history wrote with my tears
that I love you and him

They separated us
my heart is the most genuine document

Bury me to him
him to me
if one day we don't become one

Let the tombstone say they had loved
History did not love those who loved

History
and who should love you?



--------


danica_vukicevic


AVE

It's dangerous to live
Smell the enemy
And play up to your lover
I's dangerous to sit
On the beach and listen
To the sun loafing
It's dangerous to stroll 
Touch pensive tree trunks
Shake hands in the park
And swing
It's dangerous to live
Sit on the couch
And read book
Dangerous to think and laugh
Dangerous to yearn
And take a bath
Dangerous to look at things
Dangerous to sleep
And say no in a dream
Dangerous to be good looking
And have oneself photographed
As if death didn't exist



ROCKING

Tree tops hung
Like flowers out of the sky.
The sky had a pleasant glow
Even though the night was lowering
Its fish hook
We flew
One could hear us bumping 
With our bodies (hoosh) 
Into the sphere
Heading toward the tiny
Broken up Moon.



NOVICA ZDRAVKOVIC WAS HERE

O, my cowboy
Huge cockroaches
Are going by
My hands smell
Of the hospital and the pharmacy
That can be 
Forgotten
On the road to Mexico-Srem,
Dust, unpoisoned, golden
The drunken old man works like a slave
One more Season.
The heat hums making me sleep
Watermelons, tomatoes,
By the side of the road
Heaviness came from above, from inside
The inebriated blood dries out
The sun, the sun, doctor
The constant brightness: the road, the water,
The leaves
Around the monastery a plentitude of forces
Locked in, the clouds pass
I don't need to look, don't need 
To see
Houses smell of humidity
Wine flies fall in the eyes
Before the storm that is still to come.

***

O, I peeked out
The window
Opened it
Cold. Freezing. Calm. Wind.
Entered. And stayed.
I was remembering. Too much.

I throw food to the yellow dog
Pigeons. Coal miners. Lions
You can't imagine all the things that are here
Industry.

False weariness, neglect.
Waiting. Voices.
White light. Long Night.
The wheels of trains and cars pass by
I hear them.
The sound of the motor in bitter cold
Someone will come.
Lie down. Sleep. With me.
We'll be warm.
Warm.

***

Twilight
You're my village
A wheat field with crows
A field
I sing walking
Through the twilight
Hold on to the hem of my skirt
Cut the gold,
Get up before dawn
Barely lie down, before
The first crack
Thin fingernail, the moon falls off
Pumpkins grow
The tree tops begin to toll

***

At the edge of the bed
I sat
In the dead of the night
The clock was ticking
O, clock. The hours
Ticked away
My head was spinning
From so much travel.
Poppies dressed in yellow
In red
Waiting for someone to call, 
To pass over in silence
To announce, The News.
The rosy color vanished
From things.
The garden grew smaller
Darkness rose over all,
Regally, like 
Pain. 
And hissing, I remembered you
Father 
(not knowing how to cry
or to be happy)
Staring dumbly
In the madhouse
At the very ceiling
Others were staring at.
O, father.

Translated by Charles Simic

***

I've come from the forest
From a road which which lost its way
I picked wild strawberries
I've come from a lake
I drowned in it
I've come with bilberries 
And herbs
Heal my death
I want to walk 
To walk without stopping
More than anything else 
I want never to stop again
I'm tired of water, tired of death
I'll kiss you like cold snow
I've come from the forest 
The forest has no eyes or windows
I've come from the lake
I've walked on the water
And the wind
Till the moon pulled me away by my sleepy hair  

Translated by Francis R. Jones


--------


dw_gibson

AN ALL AMERICAN FIELD GUIDE TO THE OUTSIDE WORLD
(an excerpt)


Part One: It Seems That We Aren't Alone Anymore

My dad has one of them little drawers next to his bed. He knows what's in there, he told me so. Personally, I've never opened the thing. He swears up and down he's never opened it either – though this does, in fact, make me wonder how he could claim to know the contents. I know why the bible's there, that's easy. But only he knows what's left on that voice recorder. 
You know what I've been thinking about a lot lately? Whether I'd rather be blind or deaf. Like if I knew ahead of time and could pick between the two – which one would I go with? Odd Job asked me this a few days ago. I didn't know what my answer was so I asked him for his and he said it was easy, he'd go blind because he wouldn't be able to stand it all without music. And I thought that was damn near the coolest thing he'd ever come up with so I said, "Hell, I'm with you." Now whenever I bring this up with someone else – Veronica or my dad or that man who's always telling jokes, back behind the Pizza Barn – they act all shocked about my answer. "How you gonna make it through life without seeing the world?" And…I don't have an answer for them. I talk about the music, wanting it so badly, and they all just walk away, shaking their heads like they don't know what the hell to say, like I put them in some sort of trap. So that's why the question's been on my mind a lot lately – I've been stuck for a while now. It's time to get the hell out of here and this is the most incomplete, certain feeling I've ever had. It's like somebody who can't see or hear a lick but stumbles onto a starting point all the same. 
The bad news is I did start smoking again the other day, damnit, and I can tell you exactly why it happened. It's because I saw that picture of Sean Penn on the magazine up at the Minute King. He had that last bit of a Camel wedged in the corner of his mouth and I just stood there thinking how impossible it was to pass up something so satisfying, plus I could tell he was haunted and the smoke was helping him cope. Hell, I knew he was posing and all, but I still believed him. Not that I'm trying to say I'm haunted or anything. I'm not. But my dad is, and sometimes – believe me – that's just as bad. 
The good news is I've been thinking about creating some kind of opportunity for myself for some time now — maybe even something like going back to school. Of course I can't come right out with it but since my dad's been in a good mood, all busy with falling in love, I have started in with the hinting. But I still don't think he's changed his views on my future plans. Unfortunately I think we're both used to living with his hands wrapped around my throat. Seeing how he and I are the only ones left, I doubt he has serious thoughts of wringing me, but I have yet to test him. Besides, I'm not like Butch. I can't just go marching in to some fancy college like a big shot. First I need to graduate and then I need some money and then maybe it could happen. I've got ideas but they're still formulating in my head. Eventually, I'm going to be a Christian Metal God and if that doesn't go through then I'll fall back and be a preacher. I told my dad as much, I don't know how many times, but until Amaya came home with him I never could tell if he was listening. 
I guess I should explain how she and dad met. It was before he started working again, back when he was still calling in sick, saying it was because he hurt his knees but I knew damn well he was staying out of work for my sake. The situation's always been a little complicated. Long story short, I have not been permitted to attend the public high school for some time now due to various reasons including my grades, my lack of…social skills and, apparently, my attitude so that's why two years ago I moved over to Sunrise, which actually costs a whole heck of a lot of money but everyone there gets some kind of scholarship so it's fine. Although they do keep threatening about maybe shutting everything down because the money's running out. Apparently Uncle Sam stopped ponying up ages ago so they have to find more rich people every year to keep it all going. I have no clue where they find such people because they sure as hell don't squat in the holler. The school's up there all by itself, which I guess they think is going to keep everybody calm and getting along and I suppose it does the trick most of the time. Too long of a bus ride, but at least I get a bench to myself and it's the kind of school where they let me work at my own pace – which is really all I need and I tried to convey as much to that dipshit principal up at the public school. Personally I now try to avoid that place as much as I can. But my dad, he's been cleaning the bathrooms up there for nearly all his life – shit, I've heard him tell people that's why he quit school so early, because they gave him the job cleaning the bathrooms – and he understood they weren't treating me right when I was "in attendance," as they say. He was trying to stick up for me and that's why he was calling in sick, making it difficult on them. He kept finding different parts of himself that were hurting, threatening to apply for SSI – maybe even workman's comp, so they'd have to start paying him while he wasn't doing nothing. And it worked. He got them all riled up. He set at home for weeks, not picking up the phone when it'd start to ringing. I was used to seeing him stretched out on the Lazy Boy in the far corner of the den – the only spot where the sun doesn't reach all bright and hot at the end of the day. But when I came home from my youth group study he was on the couch, setting where the sun was shining, next to her with his hands to himself. Also he didn't have the television on which made everything different right away because it meant they'd been talking. As I turned the corner there were just a few whispering sounds and a breeze knocking the screen against the windowframe. I barely had two feet in the room when he stands up and says, "Well, here she is."
	"Here who is?"
	"Amaya." Looking at me like I'm stupid for asking.
	"Where she from?"
	"I'll tell you what happened – I found her setting right up there in front of the post office."
She got up off the couch and stood next to him. From across the room she looked so dang tiny next to his big bones, but then she pushed that long hair back behind her ears and them dark eyes came at me lickety-split. Her mouth was open like I was somehow the one catching her off-guard. I think she wanted to say something but nothing came out. 
	I nodded, trying to act friendly, then I asked my dad, "She work up there?"
	"Well of course she don't work up there."
"So what's she doing here?" 
"She ain't from around here, Coopboy.  If you must know she has come all the way from Peru, which you can clearly see marked on that there map." He pointed at the coffee table like he'd found that old atlas all by himself. "She speaks some fine bits of English and she's missing her family so why don't you stop being nosey and try showing a little hospitality for once."
	I don't think he cared much about her reasons for showing up because she was what I would call highly attractive. And she kept smiling at him. He kept smiling at her with his mouth wide open, and for the first time in who knows how long his breath didn't knock me back off my feet so I wasn't about to kick her out if having her stand there was enough to keep him away from the beers with that retired liver of his. I told Amaya it was nice to make her acquaintance then went on back to my room and started in on a few chords, loud and hard, so I wouldn't have to listen to them setting there talking all night.
	I saw this movie once with Steven Segal and he was giving a speech about how a lot of people have visions from their past lives. Well, I don't know about the multiple lives shit but I can tell you if it were possible my dad would be doing the opposite, having visions of his life yet to come where he will obviously be very attractive, probably a movie star with muscles and a curly mustache, and most importantly he is young and healthy, he sees everything clearly and he can listen. That day he brought Amaya home, I started buying into this future existence of his because he was at least fifty-five, and she couldn't have been a day past…thirty-seven? So I assume that's what happened down there at the post office. She looked over and caught a glimpse of what he'd look like in his next life – if he had his druthers – and, for some reason, she was willing to settle for a wrinkled version of the picture in their heads, one that came slightly slumped over with a tangled beard. 
For the first few nights he gave her his bedroom and slept out on the couch. I think he even cleaned the sheets for her because one morning I saw that old detergent setting up there on the counter. The original idea was to have her stay with us for a week. My dad's plan was to look after her until the following Sunday when he could take her on up to church so they could try and get her back home. I did point out that I didn't know what in the hell he was talking about because he hadn't been to church in seven years so I didn't know why he was acting like he remembered where the goddamn building was. He said he'd been meaning to get back for a while and now there was finally a worthy reason. I told him I was pretty sure someone was up at the church every day – I should know, seeing how I'm the one who actually goes – so he could drive her up any old time. He didn't think that was such a good idea and, sure enough, a week goes by then another and my dad never did bother taking her over to Pastor Benjamin. 
So every day they're in front of the television all morning long while my dad flips through each and every channel, using whatever shows he can find to help him explain our country, bit by bit. (I suggested he start with Leftfield and Eastern Kentucky then branch out and talk about the entire of the Appalachians, then the rest of country. It seems like a logical progression of the different parts of the USA, and he tries to stick with it but then he comes across an old episode of Miami Vice and jumps right into explaining all about Florida – where, of course, he's never been.) 
Around noon an episode of Bonanza comes on and he lets that run while they go into the kitchen to put together something to eat, usually the same old Frito Pie or microwaved burritos, even though she's always looking in our cabinets for stuff she can use to teach him how to cook up something or other that he's never heard of. My dad isn't too quick of a learn in most places and positively not in the kitchen. 
At one o'clock, they switch places on the couch for the entirety of the afternoon and she turns off the television before trying to give him an idea about what her country is like. I work in the afternoons mostly, thank God. Otherwise I'd have to set in my room, forced to listen in while my dad tries to help her piece together whatever it is she wants to say. Each word is like solving an incredibly, incredibly annoying riddle and then of course the words have to be strung into actual sentences before you can even think about making any sense of what she's really talking about. 
This has gone on for good while now, which brings me to the other night when my dad opens my door while me and Odd Job were working on a new song. I figured he was coming to complain about the noise. It turns out he barged in to say, "I've come to tell you my knees are doing just fine now."
I looked at Odd Job. We laughed at him and I said, "Thanks for the update, dad."
And he said, "Which leads me to tell you that I'm going back to work up at the school. They called and started in on begging me so I'm going over tomorrow."
I was a little surprised. Not knowing quite what to say, I dragged my pick against the E string, letting a little whine creep out of the amp. 
Then he said, "Well are you going to ask me why?"
"Why what?"
"Why I'm going back to work."
"You just said your knees are feeling better."
"Well that means I can go back to work, but that don't have anything to do with why I'm going back to work. I am returning to work tomorrow morning because Amaya has informed me that the washing machine is broken – did you know anything about this?"
"No."
"Well, neither did I…Anyway, since I can't get back on the draw, I figured the only way I'm gonna be able to pay to get it fixed for her is if I start working at the school again so that's why I'm going back and I do hope you understand." He started checking to see if he was standing up straight and he was. "Besides, I've been wanting to go on over to that JC Penny in Pikeville and pick her up a pair of earrings. I can't make that happen if I ain't got the cash in my pocket, see that's how it is." He flashed his empty hands like he needed to prove to somebody that he didn't steal anything. "I figure she deserves a pair of earrings." 
I nodded. He scratched his beard and closed the door. I should have known what he was up to from the start, seeing that it was his uniform he was buttoning up as he walked in without knocking. I'd be lying if I didn't say the decision bothered me. It did, it got under me a little bit.
I looked over at Odd Job, setting there to my left, on drums. He said, "Why you think he's doin' it?"
"Well, what do you think?— he said he's looking for those earrings." I took off my guitar to let him know I was done playing for the time being. "He might as well've come out and said it – it's more important to him to look after her than to stick up for me and let Principal Hodder know what a dickhead he is."
"Who's that principal person?"
"The one I told you about, Odd Job – up at the public school. With the mustache and the goddamn glasses setting on his fat cheeks!"
"…oh, the asshole."
"Exactly."
	"What a shitface-dickhead."
	Let me explain something about Odd Job. He and I hang out a lot. I'd say most of the time if I'm not somewhere with Veronica or extra tired then I'm usually doing something with Odd Job. A lot of people are scared of him but that's mainly because he keeps to himself and he's not real good at talking with folks. I'm not quite sure how old he is – he might have a couple of years on me, but it's hard to say because they don't have much of any record on him at the schools and his parents…let's just say they aren't exactly bookkeepers. 
I told him, "The point is, he'd rather suck it up and bow at the feet of the almighty Principal Hodder so he can buy Amaya a pair of earrings, pretending like he's got money to spend."
"C'mon Coop, we know you really belong over in the holler with me."
This might not seem like the highest form of compliment but I assure you it was. Odd Job understands that I am just like him. Just because I live in an actual house doesn't mean I'm an asshole. That's one of the reasons I quit Sunrise awhile back. Because all those dipshits liked to make fun of me, saying I didn't know what it was like, that my family had too much money for me to be as stupid as them. They think just because me and my dad live in a proper house that means we've got some money in the bank and some fancy mailbox with our names on it. But the truth is we got to keep this house because my mom's parents always felt bad for us. It's a good thing they paid it off because my dad and me, we can't even afford to keep it together. I started thinking about it all and that's when I told Odd Job I'd had enough of the music and the talking. He understood what I was saying – which is proof he's not retarded – and left straightaway. I opened up the window and turned my room upside-down looking for a cigarette. I was trying my best not to think about revenge – I knew that wouldn't be right. All I wanted was some way to help me release the anger I felt toward my dad for choosing to do what the goddamn school wanted as opposed to continuing to send them a message on my behalf. If that was his plan then so be it. He couldn't stop me from coming up with a plan of my own. So I figured right then and there that it was high time I quit the Pizza Barn. That way I could go back to Sunrise, finish up my last semester, and finally graduate. Let him deal with making money for the bills on his own. See, Butch gave me that empty frame years ago and I'll be a fuckerhead if I let another Christmas go by with my dad asking me when the hell I'm getting the high school diploma that's supposed to get taped down right inside that little red border. Sometimes I think he gets so tired he can't hardly keep his fingers wrapped tight around my throat so he'll just start poking fun – anything he can do to keep me from going anywhere – but if I give in much longer I'm liable to burst. 


--------


keki_daruwalla


Goodbye Autumn
(after Louis MacNeice)

Goodbye autumn
the nights are getting longer
the dregs in the coffee cup
hint at coming strangers 
will they come to Oberoi
or will they come to Taj?
Or to my paper-strewn flat
built years after the Raj? 
Will they come by motor boat
or will they come by air
and pass through Immigration
sans passports, without care?
Will they come with laurel leaves
or will they come with flowers
or AK 47s
and a bullet shower?  
Will we see some action
from the Home Minister
or will he be another
condolence messenger? 
The New Year is arriving
don't need coffee dregs to tell us
how will it roll the dice
will it buy or sell us?  
Will oil rise up the barrel
Will OPEC gain or lose
will we need the skateboard,
or cycle as we choose? 
Will carbon cloud the planet?
Will asthma crowd our chest?
Do we clean up the wretched smog
or merely beat our breasts? 
 
Will the new year bring me joy
Or will he bring me grief?
Will he come with ringing bells
Or sneak in like a thief? 
Goodbye autumn
the days are getting shorter
will I hit a sixer, or
be bowled out by a snorter? 



--------


michael_schmidt



Conceit

She spun a line. She knew he was listening to her.
She spun it and he took the fraying ends.
Whatever she was saying, it was cotton,

Then as he rolled the thread between 
Forefinger and thumb it turned to silk,
And as he took the needle up to thread it

The line she spun became thin finest gold.
He knew not to believe her but he took it
Because she kept on spinning like the truth

Was ravelling from her lips; he watched her lips.
Cotton, silk and gold, she wanted him
To take the line and sew the wound right up

Although she held the blade still in her hand
Behind her back, and it was dripping, steaming.
There under his left arm the gash lay open

Like a mouth in disbelief. And he believed her.



Pangur Bàn

i.

Jerome has his enormous dozy lion.
Myself, I have a cat, my Pangur Bàn.

What did Jerome feed up his lion with?
Always he's fat and fleecy, always sleeping

As if after a meal. Perhaps a Christian?
Perhaps a lamb, or a fish, or a loaf of bread.

His lion's always smiling, chin on paw,
What looks like purring rippling his face

And there on Jerome's escritoire by the quill and ink pot
The long black thorn he drew from the lion's paw.

Look, Pangur, at the picture of the lion –
Not a mouser like you, not lean, not ever

Chasing a quill as it flutters over parchment
Leaving its trail that is the word of God.

Pangur, you are so trim beside the lion. 
-- Unlike Jerome in the mouth of his desert cave

Wrapped in a wardrobe of robes despite the heat,
I in this Irish winter, Pangur Bàn,

Am cold, without so much as your pillow case
Of fur, white, with ginger tips on ears and tail.

	ii.

My name is neither here nor there, I am employed
By Colum Cille who will be a saint

Because of me and how I have set down
The word of God. He pays. He goes to heaven.

I stay on earth, in this cell with the high empty window,
The long light in summer, the winter stars.

I work with my quill and colours, bent and blinder
Each season, colder, but the pages fill.

Just when I started work the cat arrived
Sleek and sharp at my elbow, out of nowhere;

I dipped my pen. He settled in with me.
He listened and replied. He kept my counsel.

	iii.

Here in the margin, Pangur, I inscribe you.
Almost Amen. Prowl out of now and go down

Into time's garden, wary with your tip-toe hearing.
You'll live well enough on mice and shrews till you find

The next scriptorium, a bowl of milk. Some scribe
Will recognise you, Pangur Bàn, and feed you;

You'll find your way to him as you did to me
From nowhere (but you sniffed out your Jerome).

Stay by him, too, until his Gospel's done.
(I linger over John, the closing verses,

You're restless, won't be touched. I'm old. The solstice.)
Amen, dear Pangur Bàn. Amen. Be sly.


Iberian Clichés

	i. At home

A Spaniard painted the blue cow,
The dachshund and the Magdalen's crotch;
The midget with the giant prick
Is who he wished himself to be
At times, a function not a man.
He painted to discover what
The time of day, the appetite,
What was his hunger and his thirst,
Each canvas effortless with pain,
A portrait of the ones he was
Just at that hour, night or day.
To hold the bird that was the brush
Light in his fingers with its song!
To feel the heartbeat in his wrist,
His wrist alive upon its bough!
The flapping wind that beats the tree
Blows from the heart; the viscera
Root him, he moves with all his roots
Painting the cow he sees as blue,
The dachshund yapping at his heels
Familiar but not yet his own,
A penis on its four short legs
Trotting beside, sniffing a trunk;
The Magdalen who has yet to meet
Christ in the long cold room of want
And whom he loves with all his flesh
Except the heart which will belong
Always to him and him alone,
Fluttering the hair upon his chest.


	ii. Corrida

He lifts the wine-skin in the sun
And runs the stream between his lips.
Meanwhile the Macarena plays,
The bull's cavorting with a horse.
The sand like canvas takes the daubs
Of blood and excrement, the crowd
Cheers and the wine jet fills his throat
Until his heart is floating on
A bleary sea, the enormous sun
Touching the stream as if it's blood.
He wipes his famous fist across
His famous lips and thinks it's time.
He takes the woman at his side 
With her hot eyes and heavy hair
Back to his studio. 
Left behind,
The bull's arrested in the red
Deep cape, for ever: memory,
Lost in its rage and pain, its head
Under the matador's right arm.
The dancing testicles are still
In their long sack, the rump is firm;
The banderillas in his neck,
Blue, red and pink, a slime of blood
Like something intimate, obscene,
On the huge blackness of his chest
As if he was a shadow not
The substance of the Miura hills.
A black bull and its shadow grown
Together cannot be unpicked.
The artist's eye has left the scene,
Floating on air, on wine and lust.
Here there is nothing but a crowd,
A dying bull, a ring of dust.


	iii. Los Gallos

The cocks are spurred. Their coral combs 
Stiff, and all rage their tacks of eyes,
A hush. The bell. They are released
And crash together as if in love
To claw the eye, the throat, the heart.

His money's on the smaller bird
Because he liked the noise he made
Deep in his throat before the fight,
As if he had a purpose, love,
As if he called to her aloud,

As if his hen or hens could hear
His reassuring, husky voice
When, settling on their roost, they thought
Where is he? Has the moon come out?
They crash together as if in love.

He does not wait to see who wins
For fear his little bird might fare
Badly and have his gold neck wrung
In shame by the fat proprietor
With the cigar and bandaged hand.

He goes back to his studio
And leaves the two cocks in the air
Frozen forever on the point
Of death or victory. He makes
Out of their bluster an ideogram

Of violence which has found form
And finding form finds balance, too,
And in the balance figures live
Moving in stillness, still in their dance,
Deep in their chests a sound like love.

Deep in his throat the smaller cock	
(This is the lie that tells the truth)
Could feel the workings of his heart.
His trainer with a little twist
Unsheathed the spur and tried the blade.

He put the cock's face to his lips
And blew on him as if a coal,
Then threw him at the unpainted sand
To seer it with his furious knife
And daub it here and there with blood.

Was there shouting in the stands?
Each man invents in a staged death
A prize, a victory, a kiss.
In the high studio the cocks suspend
Greed and arousal, elegy.

These are two cocks a Chinese sage
Might, with a brush and pot of ink,
Casually admit to sense
As if they were in fact the word
For such convergent energies,

A human crowd aroused by blood,
The striving birds, the piles of coin,
The smell of sand and leather, smoke,
The tinny music amplified, 
The crow of the surviving cock.

An alphabet cannot reveal
The gist, for sound is not enough
To render sense, the sense of love
Or violence, of what is there
And in its being does not mean.



The Resurrection of the Body 

…So will I melt into a bath to washe them in my bloode…
S. Robert Southwell S.J.			

The cellar floor is swept. Women are weeping
Like shadows in torchlight, around the straw pallet they hover, 
The soon-to-be-mourners, a dozen, discarding their shawls, 
Unpinning their hair. It's so hot in the cellar of death. 
Professional, they know what ‘s to come: 
She will shrug, shiver, jaw drop open, let go.

Led out of blinding daylight the Healer comes down.
He raises his hand and stills the scrum of women.
He comes down like a lamp into a cavern, 
Gathering from sweltering noon light a cool glow.
He comes as if out of the desert sequinned with dew
And his gaze, austere, not unkind, goes through the women
Settling on the parched form stretched on the pallet, 
Human, almost beyond pain, but not a child.
The man did say child but she is almost a woman,
Her delicate feet, long legs, the down at her crotch,
Flat belly, firm, the handsome small domes of her breasts
Panting, panting, not a child, though her father, grieving,
Insists, believing, a child. So he says to her, child.

She focuses her dark gaze on his amazing pallor,
Her fever like a bruise against him. She closes her lips
Reaching for a sheet, the rolled winding sheet, for cover
But he makes her calm, she understands, her lips now parted
Rapt, she holds her breath (she has breath to hold now).
She watches him, he bends down to her, to lift her up,
His shirt falls open, she sees where the wounds will be.

What does he feel when he gathers her hot and shivering
Off the pallet, hardly a weight, so smooth, and all
The smells upon her, faeces and stale sweat, the scent
Of her scalp, and her breath quite sweet, a surprise;
That hot smooth flesh, that shit and flowers, urine
And something else; and the haze of down on her arms
Up to the elbows, then the quite smooth darkness,
Substance of shadow, her flesh, so smooth, and the breathing
Not weary or fretful now in that limp body;
What does he feel, seeing his own white arm beneath her dark hair,
When he knows what he holds, and what it does to his legs,
To his groin, his bowels, to his rapid heart? He holds her
And out of his chest where she is pressed against him
Flows that unusual grace which is rooted in muscle,
Which comes from the marrow and lymph, which is divine,
The grace of a man whom love has turned into God,
The love of incarnate God whose flesh knows the name of his creature.
He holds her the way his mother will soon cradle him,
Passion giving life, or love; and then compassion.

And what does she feel? Who can know what she feels?
What you would feel, or I, pressed close to his chest,
To his cool skin, his smell of the dust of the road,
Of hearth fires, of wine, the touch of his hair, of bread…
What does she feel? She feels love, she feels his desire
Confusing her, desire but not need, he holds her
Tenderly, his lips to her shoulder and hair.

Out of the cellar he bears her into the air
Shedding her pestilence and the sun dissolves it.
A crowd has assembled. He walks among the crowd
With his light burden, they watch and withdraw, afraid,
Conjuror, they see the girl gaze in his eyes.

At the well he sets her down, she can stand on her own.
At the well she stands straight as a reed and Jesus bathes her,
First her hair, he pours water from a hollowed gourd,
Then her ears and eyes and lips, her face, her neck,
Her heart and hands, her back, her belly, her long thighs,
He washes her feet as if she were a child. 
The fever has passed. She calls him father, father
Though the man who is her father stands beside him.
She calls him father. He wraps her in his own shirt.



Furniture for a Ballad

Mas, ¡ay Madre de piedad!, 
que sobre la cruz le tienden, 
para tomar la medida 
por donde los clavos entren. 
			Lope de Vega

The standing stone, the stricken tree,
The sheep among, who leave their wool,
Who crop and tup, and drop their lambs,
Into a storm, beneath a moon…

The rider on his foaming horse
At night, to ship, to tryst, to tomb,
Or to a battlefield to find
The long corpse of his broken lord…

And in Dunfermline, swilling wine
Another lord, who sneers and wipes
His signet hand across his jowl,
Calls for his whore, his harp, his hound…

The new moon rocks the old, old moon
In its bowed arms, as if a child;
The old moon fades into a bruise,
The new moon fattens on its pain.

And who is she there on the prow
Of castle, town, of manse or grange
Gazing in dread that it is death 
She sees, her lover on the heath

Coming to her to breathe his last
Into her mouth, a kiss, a cough;
She hungers for him and that breath
He feeds her at a stanza's end,

So like a host upon the tongue
And in his side a gash, his feet
Holed, and his hands. Don't call him Christ.
Leave him unnamed and cradle him.

The borders, marches deep in furze,
The dripping rocks, the swelling moor,
The stricken tree, all see him pass
On his high steed. Is he the Word?

He rides away and leaves deep cloud,
A fleece of grace, the woman still
High on the prow, her arms awake
To catch him living, hold him dead.

He travels south, where he will climb
A higher cross than any here.
Though he passed here and everywhere,
He took his blood and bread away

To Palestine, where prophets said
He'd live and die and rise again.
Within the ballad death is death.
It cannot pray, it can't believe.

And yet it might go after him,
Bear him back to stretch him here
Because of love, because of love,
The night, the maid, the sheep among.

A ballad cannot raise the dead.
It grieves and kills, it grieves again.
Let her in the blown midnight wait
Like a new moon imbibing pain.

Thus he will live and she expect
His visit and her ravishment,
His lips, the thunder of his pulse,
Her handsome womb his citadel...

Leave metaphysics to the Jews.
The crofter minds his wretched sheep,
The lord is rusting in the rain,
The woman stifles a fat yawn,

Goes in, sits down, he has not come.
She drinks a potion, sleeps and dreams,
The standing stone, the stricken tree,
Into a storm, beneath a moon…

We lose her as the night resigns
And so it is, the ballad's made
Out of such furniture as these,
The dripping fern, a daylight moon.



Not Yet

My father said he'd have to cut the tree down,
It was so high and broad at the top, and it leaned
In towards the house so that in wind it brushed
The roof slates, gables and the chimney stone
Leaving its marks there as if with intent.

We said, don't cut it yet, because the tree was so full
Of big and little nests, of stippled fruit.
In spring and summer it spoke in a thousand voices,
The chicks upturned for love, the birds like fishes
Swimming among the boughs, and always talking.

And then a day came when the chicks woke up.
Love was all over, they tumbled from their nests
Into the air, ricocheted from a leaf, a branch,
Almost hit the ground, then found their wings
And soared up crying, brothers, sisters, crying.

Then the nests were vacant. Now we must cut the tree,
My father said. Again we begged, not yet,
Because with autumn the freckled fruit began
To turn to red, to gold, like glowing lamps
Fuelled with sweetness filtered from the soil

And scent that was musk and orange, peach and rose.
And when they dropped (they grew on the topmost branches,
Could not be picked, we took when it was offered)
We wiped them clean and sliced out the darkening bruise
Where they'd bounced on the yellow lawn, by then quite hard

With winter coming. The fruit were so much more than sweet,
Eve fell for such fruit and took Adam with her:
No serpent whispered, no god patrolled the garden.
Only my father. Again, not yet, we said, remembering
What winter had to do with our huge bent tree,

Once it had got the leaves off. We knew the hoar-frost
Tracery and the three-foot icicles
And how it simply was, the December moon
Lighted upon it and hung in its arms like a child.
Not yet, we said, not yet. And my father died,

And the tree swept the slates clean with its wings.
The birds were back and nesting, it was spring,
And nothing had altered much, not yet, not yet. 



'His father was a baker . . .'
for A.G.G			

His father was a baker, he the youngest son.
I understand they beat him, and they loved him.

His father was a baker in Oaxaca:
I understand his bakery was the best

And his three sons and all his daughters helped
As children with the baking and the pigs.

I can imagine chickens in their patio,
At Christmastime a wattled turkey-cock, a dog

Weathered like a wash-board, yellow-eyed,
That no one stroked, but ate the scraps of bread

And yapped to earn its keep. I understand
The family prospered though the father drank

And now the second brother follows suit.
I understand as well that love came

Early, bladed, and then went away
And came again in other forms, some foreign,

And took him by the heart away from home.
His father was a baker in Oaxaca

And here I smell the loaves that rose in ovens
Throughout a childhood not yet quite complete

And smell the fragrance of his jet-black hair,
Taste his sweet dialect that is mine too,

Until I understand I am to be a baker,
Up before dawn with trays and trays of dough

To feed him this day, next day and for ever --
Or for a time -- the honey-coloured loaves.
 


--------


arthur_sze


IN YOUR HONOR

In your honor, a man presents a sea bass
tied to a black-lacquered dish by green-spun seaweed.

"Ah" is heard throughout the room:
you are unsure what is about to happen.

You might look through a telescope at the full
bright moon against deep black space,

see from the Bay of Dew to the Sea of Nectar,
but, no, this beauty of naming is a subterfuge.

What are the thoughts of hunters driving
home on a Sunday afternoon empty-handed?

Their conception of honor may coincide
with your conception of cruelty? The slant

of light as sun declines is a knife
separating will and act into infinitely thin
	
and lucid slices. You look at the sea bass's eye,
clear and luminous. The gills appear to move

ever so slightly. The sea bass smells
of dream, but this is no dream. "Ah,

such delicacy" is heard throughout the room,
and the sea bass suddenly flaps. It

bleeds and flaps, bleeds and flaps as
the host slices slice after slice of glistening sashimi.



The Great White Shark

For days he has dumped a trail of tuna blood
into the ocean so that a great white shark

might be lured, so that we might touch its fin.
The power of the primitive is parallactic:

in a museum exhibit, a chacmool appears as elegant
and sophisticated sculpture, as art, but

witness the priest rip the still-beating heart
out of the blue victim's body and place it

pulsing on a chacmool and we are ready to vomit.
We think the use of a beryllium gyroscope

marks technological superiority, but the urge
of ideologies then and now makes revenge inexorable.
	
The urge to skydive, rappel, white-water kayak
is the urge to release, the urge to die.

Diamond and graphite may be allotropic forms
of carbon, but what are the allotropic forms

of ritual and desire? The moon shining on black water,
yellow forsythia blossoming in the April night,

red maple leaves dropping in silence in October:
the seasons are not yet human forms of desire.



X AND O

Someone flips a lit match off the road
near a cluster of cattails, takes
another swig of beer, presses on the gas;
the match is not specifically aimed
at you: you just happen to be there--
at a stop sign, in a parking lot,
on a ferry, at a terminal; as a lens
narrows sunlight to a point which blackens
into flame, go ahead, zero in, try
to x out a ball of jasmine sprig
that unfurls in boiling water, x out
a red-tailed hawk shifting on a cottonwood
branch at dusk, x out coyotes yipping
as they roam by new moonlight up the road,
x out the dissolving suture threads
in your mouth, x out a dog's bark,
a baby magpie fallen from a nest
wandering on gravel, x out a flicker
feather in the mud; you can't x out
diarrhea, x out a barn erupted into flames,
x out firefighters lined up in trucks
along Russian olives, x out the charred
grass and stubs of fence posts, x out
a pang, place of birth or time of death,
x out, at an intersection of abscissa
and ordinate, dark matter that warps
space and time; you can't x out a cloud,
so make a lens of it the next time
you chop cilantro at a counter, the next
time you push through a turnstile.					



SYZYGY

I notice headlights out the living room window
then catch the bass in a pickup as it drives by.
I am shocked to learn that doctors collected
the urine of menopausal nuns in Italy to extract
gonadotropins. And is that what one draws,
in infinitesimal dose, out of a vial?
I remember a steel wool splinter in my finger
and how difficult it was to discern, extract
under a magnifying glass; yet—blue mold,
apple dropping from branch—it is hard to see
up close when, at the periphery, the unexpected
easily catches the eye. Last Thursday night,
we looked through binoculars at the full moon,
watched it darken and darken until, eclipsed,
it glowed ferrous-red. By firelight, we glowed;
my fingertips flared when I rubbed your shoulders,
softly bit your ear. The mind is a tuning fork
that we strike, and, struck, in the syzygy
of a moment, we find the skewed, tangled
passions of a day begin to straighten, align, hum.



Looking Back on the Muckleshoot Reservation 
from Galisteo Street, Santa Fe

The bow of a Muckleshoot canoe, blessed 
with eagle feather and sprig of yellow cedar, 
is launched into a bay. A girl watches 
her mother fry venison slabs on a skillet—	
drops of blood sizzle, evaporate. Because
a neighbor feeds them, they eat wordlessly;
the silence breaks when she occasionally 
gags, reaches into her throat, pulls out hair.
Gone is the father, riled, arguing with his boss, 
who drove to the shooting range after work;
gone the accountant who embezzled funds, 
displayed a pickup, and proclaimed a winning
flush at the casino. You donate chicken soup
and clothes but never learn if they arrive 
at the south end of the city. Your small 
acts are sandpiper tracks in wet sand.
Newspapers, plastic containers, beer bottles
fill the bins along this sloping one-way street.



Pig's Heaven Inn

Red chiles in a tilted basket catch sunlight—
we walk past a pile of burning mulberry leaves 
into Xidi village, enter a courtyard, notice
an inkstone, engraved with calligraphy, filled 
with water and cassia petals, smell Ming 
dynasty redwood panels. As a musician lifts 
a small xun to his mouth and blows, I see kiwis 
hanging from branches above a moon doorway:
a grandmother, once the youngest concubine, 
propped in a chair with bandages around 
her knees, complains of incessant pain; 
someone spits in the street. As a second
musician plucks strings on a zither, pomelos 
blacken on branches; a woman peels chestnuts;
two men in a flat-bottomed boat gather 
duckweed out of a river. The notes splash, 
silvery, onto cobblestone, and my fingers 
suddenly ache: during the Cultural Revolution, 
my aunt's husband leapt out of a third-story 
window; at dawn I mistook the cries of
birds for rain. When the musicians pause, 
Yellow Mountain pines sway near Bright 
Summit Peak; a pig scuffles behind an enclosure; 
someone blows their nose. Traces of the past
are wisps of mulberry smoke rising above 
roof tiles; and before we too vanish, we hike 
to where three trails converge: hundreds 
of people are stopped ahead of us, hundreds 
come up behind: we form  a rivulet of people 
funneling down through a chasm in the granite.




--------


dilip_chitre


In This Crowd Of Sad And Lonely People

In this crowd of sad and lonely people
I too am sad and lonely
Groping my way through the affluent bazaar of the illusions of Europe
It's difficult to get home from here
In the twentienth century
Because the poor-rich crowd at home is
Desperately struggling to reach here
The sooner the better

Sooner or later our own kids too
Will start playing in loneliness
In the near future they'll start working and earning
If they're even more capable they will
Go and settle down in Europe or America
They'll work day and night
Constantly buy new things
If they feel sad or lonely
They'll resort to psychotherapy
They'll fight
Get divorced
They'll seek alternatives to sexual pleasure
They'll find treatments to satisfy intellectual hunger
They'll follow ways to repress emotion
Where's the courage left for human beings to celebrate
Their poverty now?
The time of human beings is already over



At The Height Of The Night In The Dazzling Bathroom

At the height of the night in the dazzling bathroom
Sparkling water pours into the tub like a waterfall
Both the faucets of the sink gurgling
Both the mirrors brightly glittering

The lights blaze, a medicinal odour fills
The nostrils, the rubber of the slippers sticks to the feet.
How disturbed is the water!
If the veins were cut, silently, it'll all be red.

We're going to live till we die, whether it's you or me,
After celebrating lovemaking in this naked
Fierce light starting the shower
Soaping and scrubbing the body clean.

Before returning to the bedroom once more,
Counting our organs on our fingers,
Wiping our bodies with towels, gargling our mouths,
Searching for our spectacles and contact lenses.

My mind like a sheet spotted once more
Will be beaten and rinsed all over again
Rhythmically as in a washing machine in your orgasm
Before the automatic control shuts off the whine.



The Fourth Brandenburg Concerto-3
In G Major:  Allegro, Andante, Presto

Luminous gardens of soluble notes :
Like skies shedding flowers while blossoming.
The tender sunrays of astonishing compassion,
Two flutes running through the bows of a violin,
We swirl in the middle of it,
A lotus closes up its petals around the bees
Humming upon it.

Later, on the path in the opened head, one walks
With melodious feet in ten directions---
The path that is bold and clear and red
The garden dissolves and in its place one sees
The original forest of God's imagination
A vast complex untangled by a single simple law.

Again the flute, again the violin, again the same phrases,
Like a leitmotif: but with a changed face.
Now even the sky has become simple.
From the bowed strings the memories of the flutes
Arriving on the earth. Suddenly before the last chord
Sounds, the dual strum. Again the same phrase.



In September

In the park before me the trees in September
Trees of so many names like Silver Maple and Bur Oak
Suddenly smouldered with coloured leaves before the fall
Day after day the flocks of migratory birds flew away
Towards nature beyond the sight in the south
My window was lit every evening
Beyond my typewriter on the table used to be a sunset
Blank pages got filled with black letters
Later when it got dark beams of light scoured the highway
The whine of the airconditioner would never go away
Tassos Denegris would smoke a joint and write
Poems in Greek hour after hour
And Geraldo Cesar Hurtado laughing like a lunatic
Playing Strauss's Zarathustra on his stereo
Phoned every half-an-hour to say that no greater poet than himself ever wrote in Spanish
Now at this age, and in this country, lying down alone,
What am I searching?



The Banyan Tree

I still dream of that banyan tree
Of which I am only an aerial root and branch
The tree circumambulated by
Generations of Savitri

Space cannot be captured by spreading branches
Soil cannot be appropriated by striking roots
Although every seed has a potential forest within it
There are billions of seeds that simply cannot  sprout

This is a spendthrift festival
Celebrated by the death of many Satyavanas
Yama blesses only Savitri

I still dream of that banyan tree
As though in a tiny seed a whole inverted forest grows
Proclaiming the counter-space of liberation
Against the will to sprout.



Lord Let It Rain Even In This Country

Lord let it rain even in this country
Where water smells of murder
Where sugarcane or jute is grown in a field of violence
Where, as long as You are, Lord, frustration is forbidden

Lord let it rain even in this country
Where society is cultivated by using human lives as fertilizer
Where victims have faith in You
And those that prey on them are Your avatars

Lord let it rain even in this country
Where famines bring fortunes to some
Where the machines of human concern never stop
Where compassion works overtime

Lord let it rain even in this country
For those who overeat here sing melodies
And those who starve accompany them
Where famine and plenty dwell happily together

Lord let it rain even in this country














--------


adam_czerniawski


HUNTING THE UNICORN 

Stepping lightly along cresting waves
he was now a speck on the far horizon
clouded round with sky-blue leaves -
and behind him a pack of hounds and huntsmen
blundering about baying and blowing horns
sinking in bogs and overgrown gulleys 
His watery eyes
reflected the sea wind's veins 
There were 37 huntsmen
and 31 hounds, the best of their breed 
the above facts were set down in a district office
in the presence of numerous witnesses
but we still lack the data
needed to say what equals x 
Listening in the distance
to the barking of horns
and the crack of thickets and branches
he pauses
milk-white and solitary
veiled in a landscape of ferns
lit by a sun of edgy leaves 
And so on a warm day he set off for the west
on a wave of blue wind 
but we still lack the relevant facts 

translated by Iain Higgins
 


SCIENCE FICTION 

On this three-dimensional planet
sprung from cosmic dust
the cherry blooms and the oriole sings
water finds its own level Newton's laws
tolerate no exceptions, at dusk the lindens
saturate the air, a man,
laying his hand on a woman's breast,
will say he loves her. 

translated by Iain Higgins 
 


FIRST SNOW 

on the first day of our era
on the island of sumiram the first snow fell 
patterns of stars covered
the indolent green of the tropical forests
on the island of sumiram 
while on the first day of our era
snow was falling on the island of sumiram
the inhabitants slept
while the inhabitants slept on the island of sumiram
snow was falling
when they woke from the cold the snow
had already vanished into the underbrush 
some maintain simply that on the first day of our era
a plague and an earthquake depopulated
the island of sumiram 
no wonder then
that both contemporary sources
and later traditions
tell us nothing
about the snow
which evidently spared the island of sumiram 

translated by Iain Higgins 

 

WORDS AND DUST 

People brush against life
brush against the foreshadowings of trees and rocks
brush against themselves
lately they've begun to brush against
distant continents against the stars even 
Thanks to this osmosis a view from the grey universe
has opened onto pines lakes glaciers and lions
they glisten display their hues and laugh in the sun
silhouetted in the moon's glow
now flint is sparking poetry flashes
love is aflame the eye focussed 
Now death rubs against people
they crumble crack disintegrate
their dust their rubble their fine cinders
settle on trees rocks on the stars even
a film of grey covers objects
both real and conventional
it's no longer possible to distinguish
thrones from kings memory from divination
women from roses or priests from damnation 

translated by Iain Higgins 
 
 
 
YOU AND I 

We carved boats from rust-coloured bark;
we shall make masts out of twigs
and sails from torn newspapers;
here on the wrinkled puddle
we'll give them to the wind. 
And there they are now
drifting to the very centre
tossing and trembling
beyond our reach. 
Above us the murmur of bare trees
and a pale spectral sun. 
Sometimes we also walk
to the edge of the great clear waters
and even to the foaming
sea, where we play
ducks and drakes, which skip skip on the water
fly briefly then sink. 
This is our dialogue. 
Let the winter branches speak for us
or the sailboats of oak bark,
now somewhere well out on the boundless
ocean. 

translated by Iain Higgins 
 


FOR THE MUSES' RETURN 

Three or maybe two
came
from fields now sated with milky darkness;
they merged with the contours of pines and melodies
and turned the pale afterglow of a somnolent sky
into gusty wind. 
I no longer see them
but now read with difficulty:
You are here on the 27th July 1991
conscious
though fearful;
record this moment,
note it down.
Time flows in you
falls into waters of unbeing
in which you will vanish;
leave a trace
perhaps someone lost in the evening
will find shelter here;
leave a light
in the window. 
 


--------


aminur_rahman


The Sculpture

From the mist's dense cape
I carve your body's shape --
gently sculpting, all morning.

With my eyes shut, I sit
amid the fog's heavy sheets
as its frost settles 
on my cheek, ear, and nose.
The same hands, 
the same lips, the same eyes --
I find them with such ease --
Your torso floats on that river; 
I shall conquer its flow.
Your figure blossoms, freeing itself,
leaving behind sun's light
and fog's ephemeral body.
You're entwined with my soul -- 
its root, plinth, and depth.

Translated by Sudeep Sen



Kill Me

Kill me with your dedicated heart.
Reduce me to smithereens through your act of sex.
Murder me with madman's madness.
Burn me in your heart.
Kill me through your creativity.
Annihilate me with the wet-foam of sex.
Destroy me with your erogenous zones.
Tear me apart with your love.
Bite me bite my crotch.
Embrace me in my death's ecstasy.

Translated by Sudeep Sen



Solitary Dependence

Very little, can hurt me these days,				
my grief's address lives on forever.

My solitary dependence awakens at midnight,
I feel the cold under my feet;
my eyes, wide open, sees the endless expanse
encompassing a courtyard-space of existence,
just your shadow.

Who are you? Who are you?

Sometimes you feel familiar,
at other times, unfamiliar.
Sometimes the play-of-light lives in you,
other times, only pre-dawn's darkness.
Sometimes you seem so simple,
at other times, full of doubt.
Sometimes you seem to be in this world,
other times, in some other.
Sometimes you are child-like,
at other times, just endlessly silent.

Who are you? Who are you?

The night trembles, the heart flutters
like leaves whispering to the breeze.

The waves stir on the placid river,
the fish are motionless,
and the stars weave dreams.

Who are you? Who are you?

Engulfed in a soundless world,
I sit alone
as the ruddy-night bleeds away.

Another night arrives,
moves, moves on, turns back to whisper
its suicidal urges.

Who are you? Who are you?

Very little, can hurt me these days,
my grief's address lives on forever.

Translated by Sudeep Sen



Confusion

Little by little, everything is crumbling --
bricks, stones, my heart too is crumbling.

Even though there has been 
no slack in applying enough plaster -- red, blue, green,
yellow -- whatever colour we get, we mix.
They do not always mix, yet we keep trying.

I want to keep breathing and lie on the river's breast,
live by seeing the sky's blue,
keep alive by smelling the flower's scent.

Nevertheless, the confusion carries on.
The plaster peels off --
bricks, stones, and my heart.

This is the way I walk, talk,
live, and sometimes even die.
Nobody knows that, nobody understands.

Does the river understand, or the sky?
Does the sky understand?
Does the flower understand?

Do they really understand everything?
Or just console themselves in confusion?

Life and life's realisation -- what's the relation?
Living and stagnation -- what's the relation?
Human beings and monkeys -- what's the relation?
Liking and loving -- what's the relation?


Little by little, everything is crumbling --
bricks, stones, my heart too is crumbling.

Translated by Sudeep Sen



Self-willed exile

I longed to sit side by side till eternity 
You and I were traveling together   
With luggage of dream
Wandering along I felt like touching your hand
You said "you will not touch me"
With mesmerized eyes 
I glanced at your exquisite lips
You said "turn aside your look"

These so many days rolled into a year or more 
Poetry has remained banished from me
Or I have led an ostracized life from poetry

I am taking food, walking along and talking to you
Tell me correctly am I really in exile
Or totally steeped in the realm of poesy-

May be I have scarcely written a line of verse
All these days
But I dwell in the abode of poesy
My address is still the same old
- Stand of unfathomable ocean of poetry

Where windy doors remain open
Where joy of bliss trickles down from green leaves
Where water birds descend from clouds

I live there 
And dwell in depths deeper than dream
Where it is possible to be in communion with soul
I live there
I shall remain there till eternity
Let that life be a life of exile from poetry.

Translated by A Z M Haider



SUICIDE  

I am a demented and distracted child of time
Spontaneity and transparency do not
mark fruition of dream
Dream deception has spread out
Its incomparable hand
Untiring harmony of suicide

Ceaseless rapture of artistic endeavour
Infernal somersault characterize 
Every pore of soul
Minimum soundness of health is plagued
Gradually fountain longed for is losing

Translated by A Z M Haider



NOSTALGIA

I hear the jingle of chains
and lose myself continuously in the never ending clinking
Intense pungency of old tobacco makes me dizzy 
Again euphoria touches my soul. 

I hear the jingle of chains
and feel invisible through my heart and soul
I humble myself like many
I crave to rise above the darkness
But again lose myself into a deep unconsciousness

I hear the jingle of chains
I look for them amidst the clattering
Brace myself to face them
they hit me with larger vigour
feel the breath through the backbone

I hear the jingle of chains
I see myself reflected in the faces 
covered with bloody coffin
In the pebbles hidden by earth
and  I tremble with fear
And collapse while retreating
words approaches me as a shackle
And fasten my two hands
clattering of the chain goes and goes into a gradual wane. 

I hear the jingle of chains!!
 
Translated  by M S A Sarwar




--------


imtiaz_dharker


All these poems are from 
‘Leaving fingerprints' by Imtiaz Dharker
to be published by Bloodaxe Books UK autumn 2009


The missing piece

The whole world has shrunk 
into a puzzle.

Someone is piecing it together.
Someone else is looking over her shoulder,
the maker in a breathing room.

She is building the picture from the outside
in. First the gilded border, then the story
told in one more jigsawed piece,
the intricate teeth fitted perfectly 
to reveal the glass, the carafe.
Look now, here, the princess lost
in music, the women playing a drum, a lute,
eyes closed, bodies swaying.

She lifts another piece and hesitates
at a space where nothing fits. 
Over her hand another hand is joining in, a glove 
of sunshine from the other time.
And there they are, for a moment,
The one who made the puzzle,
The one assembling it today,
The ones who are being assembled,
The instruments they are, the ones they play,

all the hands poised above a hole in the world,
joined in puzzlement.



Leaving fingerprints

I know this frosted landscape
better than it knows itself, its layers 
a busy clock of history, still ticking.

Under my feet I feel the trail of the slug, 
the snail, the earth's deep squirm 
around an anklet or an amulet, a broken cup.

Lost, the names of the ones
whose fingers made and used
and threw away these things, 

now dug in, clasped by roots, hugged 
to the earth's chest, live. The worm's heave 
and turn delivers messages up 

through folds of soil and mud, afterthoughts 
that grow to trees, trunks with arms,
branches with fingers, twigs with nails,

scratches on air, tear 
after tear on the white page.
These names have given their artefacts away

to be sparse as winter. Here I am, they say. 
Here and here for you to see,
fingerprinted on the sky.



First gift

Don't expect a silver spoon from me.

I would give you this instead. 

A coral spoon from Turkey, fished out 
of the Marmara sea where mermaids 
dined off dolphins' backs, flicking iridescent tails.

A well-used wooden spoon from Russia,
scarred by banging against a table, bean 
and barley flying past the infant's crumpled face. 

A spoon discovered in Iceland, carved 
from horn and frozen in a spoke of frost, lost 
while the Queen of the Mountain tried to feed the Beast. 

A shell spoon from Macedonia, a dipper from Peru, 
a wooden ladle from Fiji made from the magic 
kava kava root to cause love in unexpected places. 

Each one fed another mouth 
and had good daily use. 

Of all the riches in the world 
I would give you only this,

a simple way to know their lips,

to feel the hands that touched 
the hand-me-down.



Ceremony

Bring me from New Guinea the branch of a tree,
the coconut shell, the snail-silver clod.
Bring me the root and the leaf and the pod
to fashion a birth with the hand of the dead.

I will work on the mask made of Malaga wood,
flesh out its face with fibre and mud,
ease through my hands its breath and it's blood
and its half-shaven skull to remember the dead.

Draw over my head the Papuan lime.
Plant in my eyes the blossoms of fire.
Pull over my face the years of desire,
the greed of the living to honour the dead.

Let his soul pass out of quick clay and bone,
give him safe passage, make way through the crowd
with feasting and dancing and singing aloud.
Let his face live on mine when I laugh for the dead.



Landscape with poppies 

The sound was the best part, 
bubbling through the pipes,
the way breath and water
mix to make happiness. 

The old women collected
round the narghile, cackling,
puffing at the reed, till the smoke 
patted them on the head. 

The haze above them could 
belong to poets, but their verses  
were the names of neighbours, 
someone's daughter, the cadence  

of a joke that made the 

other women laugh and slap 
a thigh or clap a hand 
across a malicious mouth.

Sometimes when they were gone 
I would put my mouth to the pipe 
and imagine being old 
and chortling as they did, wickedly.

But the chillum is standing 
in the cupboard now 
dusty with disuse, 
as if in disgrace.

I asked my grandmother 
the other day, ‘Shall I get out 
the narghile? Should I clean the pipes?'
But she shook her head.

‘The times have changed,'
she said. 



Seed-box

I am lying on my back 
in this wide field, the earth 
a drum under my heels, 
My horizon is poppies 
lit up by the sun.

These flowers are wrinkling tissue, 
fragile skin on stalks. I am waiting 
for the red to drop 
across my mouth and eyes. 

I am waiting 
for the surprise of sky 
when petals fall and pods 
turn dry, when the wind 
comes up and rocks 
my cradle of stems.

Then the seeds will jump  
and rattle inside their hardened 
box,

ready. 
Ready or not, here I come. 



--------


istok_osojnik



(From the "Global Positioning System")
Postcard from the island of Hvar
To speak from a place from which silence speaks. Seven
of my hearts have put on Greek armour. They are running across 
the Kopais plain below the Kithairon of my imagination. How
catch dreams that have untied your hands? From letter to letter I open the shutters
on a tiny house that resembles a children's toy, a tiny house 
in a tiny house in which there is another tiny house, and one more, 
and it sings like the songs of Strniša.
To see and experience something for the first time, like a man counting pebbles. The shadows frighten me off. I shut down the computer and go
to the mall. I drive around town. In my left pocket a piece of folded paper, a super-conductor, a piece of the iron a man carries in his heart.
And drinks from, and eats from.Fog is something beautiful: 
for a man who doesn't sleep it washes his eyes, kisses his soul. 
The land inside is green. 
The sky green. 
Green sea. 
Green city. 
Green moonlight. 
Something green up to the sky.
Green earwig.
The sea undulates against morning, 
sadness glimmers in glass-like depths. 
The green boots on my feet run down there
amidst the cicadas and olive trees. At night I dive into a well and bring up 
some pebbles that kept my heart warm. 
Morning light feels out a face and shapes it into 
a delicate flower. I walk. The sky gently touches the rooftops. 
A green hippopotamus is swimming. Seagulls are screeching. 
If you touch me your knees will turn into creepers and break into flower. 
Water is as clean as honey.
Lavender nests on the soul's crossroads. Light is thinner than a rosemary twig. An endless field of lavender.
The smell of coffee.

                                       Translated by Ana Jelnikar, David and Teja Brooks

(From the »Darkness in July«)



FATHER

You never said anything
and I never heard anything
but there is no doubt: 
the best in me
comes from
the twilight of your
silence. 
There glows the measure
for the deep end of memory,
for the inquiring looks from under the eyebrows,
for the rustle of woods on the steep dark  green slopes,
for the wild heights wrapped in fog
And farther still, like a shriek of a bird
that dashes out of a damp shadow for the sun,
for the slopes amid the grapes, tottering into wine
under the golden weight of autumn. 
Out of you grows the remembrance of the Tyrol cravings for the Mediterranean,
those tough green irons on the pyramids of the red granite over Bozen.
Or of the long, moist nights,
out of which dreams spread deep into the tissue
of another reality,
nights, out of which I awoke shaken,
sullen, subdued, 
a witness to prenatal states,
unable to communicate them well,
stammering and still wet from the true/real sobbing of my soul. 

Later though, imperceptibly almost, down
the valleys of dark green hips
and sharp rocks, slashed from the ice and the sun.  
You may have known it all,
of the chain of fathers and sons and how the accumulated experience
is passed into seed and from one soul to another.
Up the valley, along the river, the waves of 
world history penetrated, touching the cells' nuclei, marking them. 
The world is centerless. 
An ancestor, absorbed in thought, raised his eyes and
erected a chapel for a saint at the mouth of the river, 
into the ravine he built a sign
which people came to see from afar, wanting to learn of …

History ebbed and flowed like a flood, 
it named sons or daughters, leaving them indelibly marked. 
We all are marked,
with focused foreheads we all have written 
what we have not always understood. 
We have left graves behind, strewn with flint sand,
now ablaze with the shattered sun. 
We are motionless like a sparrow hawk on a twig. 
The gaze of the deceased harbored also our confidence and strength.
This presence, this measure, moves through the silence                                                                      like the deer in the dark,
across the invisible insight that resides differently and travels differently.
And not just you and I, everyone trembles awe-struck by these
vistas, by the spirit that winds through the valley,
vivid from the blossoming fruit trees, 
baroque like the royal carriage from Statenberg Castle 
                                                             that pulled up at the house,
dusky like the cloister and the park in the front,
where once, feeling anxious, you would wait
on your mother to return from the confession,
while in the vineyard cottage,
which was nationalized after the war together with the rest of 
the estate, dad was making wine awarded 
with the diploma that still hangs on the wall I am now looking at. 


			Translated by Ana Jelnikar

(A sequence from "MISTER TODAY") 



TRUTH

Mister Today pondered:
truth is irrelevant, what matters is what people think.

For example: father, dying opposite the room
in which there is a wheezing man 
who has by and large cooked up the Balkan butchery. 
(Stane Dolanc, an apparition reduced to gargling and a coma.)
I was at my father's side when he was lying at the neurological 
clinic (unworthy of that name). I was with him the moment 
he came out of a month's coma and looked at me with eyes full 
of vacant amazement. I was there also when he was forcibly 
transferred from the clinic to a hospital in Mengeš.
And also when we finally succeeded in getting him 
into the elderly people's home in Kolezija, where, twice today
already, he has gone to the other side among the unattainable
shadows. But a few times, when he was awake, I wasn't there. 
Father is now taking leave for ever, thinking
his eldest son has forgotten him.
An irretrievable and irreparable thought, finality as such,
no history can amend.

And the other way round? 
If truth matters and not what people think?
Where does that take us? There beyond the human world, 
where the primeval reality of the world rests?

Mister Today pondered, but received no answer.
An answer may come by itself.

				Translated by Ana Jelnikar



EUROPEAN VILLAGE

At two in the morning the average European 
sends love letters to the stars 
over his village.
An old goat, upside down, bemoans the fact
he cannot master even more extravagance.
I am experimenting with myself, it occurs to Mister Today.
A black raven under the whiteness of a naked lightbulb.
Wingless fish fly around my head, seven thousand
fish of Swedenborg's from the topmost heavens over Notranjska.
One day someone will write an essay on this. What will he consider?
What is generic here? A distant train rumbling across 
the old Austro-Hungarian bridge near Prestranek?
How far is this from the supermarkets in America?
The yellow morning light in my computer's blue guitar,
a glass giant river gliding across my soul with the sky above the village,
but nothing bothers me, even if three times this size
the river will devour the sky and night
and my little fortune, occasionally no bigger than 
                                        a few lines of poetry,
which make my life quite decent,
happy inkpot.

                                          Translated by Ana Jelnikar



Mister Today

Mister Today  an apt name  plucked 
a quill from his tail and began to write. 
Mister Today, have you had anything good to eat?
(He's just got back from the super-market.).
This stalwart boy has heard about Internet  
even he has come under the influence of post-technologies.. 
But he still had his quill and a wobbly tower 
of books under his arm. 
It was very late. We live in terrible times, he said. 
The obscurantist middle-ages started fifteen years ago.
Wars came over like bad weather and then lightning struck.
The result gutted was isolated nations and borders,
splashed over with huge amounts of money.
Life got more expensive. Prices went berserk. 
Zeno Today would be wearing a digital watch.
He'd divide the infinitude of an arrow's descent
into hundred of millions of a second.
He would never have thought days could fly by so fast.
Mister Today took another sip of beer and wiped his mouth. 
This joint's no longer what it was, he murmured. 
The beer's bad. And expensive.
By the way, the poetry they read here isn't much better either. 
As usual Mister Today said a bit too much. 
Mister Today who rides around the town on his bike. Mister 
Today up to now seemed like a Martian.
For in this country, everything has become really bizarre. 

                                                     Translated by Ana Jelnikar, and Frank Kazich



Press conference

Mister Today has wandered into a press conference.
They were launching selected poems of two world poets, 
one big and one not so big.
This is how it ends, he thought.
This is the meaning of poetry. To be launched
in a bookshop in a provincial town.
On a grey autumn day, 
waiting for a coffee
to be served
following the empty bullshit.

                                                    Translated by Ana Jelnikar

One Last More

Mister Today, somebody doubtlessly
you've grown tired of,
looked at the sky and said:
True, my world is big as the universe
above my village;
but, alas, the village itself is a good deal
smaller..

                              Translated by Ana Jelnikar, and Frank Kazich


--------


ashok_vajpeyi


Once

That which once withers
may hardly ever bloom.

Flowers, words or love
wings, dreams or memories
when they escape from life
will never ever return.

This is the occasion
to tend and care,
sitting together
singing
this very moment
challenging death
buying time.

Once shriveled
charred and destroyed
there will be time
only to repent.

That which once withers
may hardly ever bloom.



The last ballad

There is always some hope -
in the heat of summer
when everything dries up
a bit of dampness remains
in a puddle.

Under a heavy rock
lurk swarms of insects.

The swollen Chandrabhaga
swallows up everything -
houses, cattle
fields and gardens -
remains a thatched roof
entangled in a tree,
a little girl clinging.

After the cruel silence
of rejection
remains a word, unheard
echoing.

There is always some hope.



The hand I

This joy too
will be unbearable
like the entire world
shrinking into a flower
clasped in a palm
or, a straw flying
in the sky - 
a nest's dream.

In the dark, a hand
grasping another, refusing
hesitating, then releasing,
a well-lit place, dazzling
till it disappears,
one day
this joy too
will be unbearable.



The Hand II

I will keep everything
as before -
books on the table,
a little water in the glass
for quenching thirst
after a while,
my hand pressing the right ankle, in pain.

In the autumn sky
a half-moon,
on the tree of darkness
like fruits and flowers
a few fireflies
and a few stars
in the brightness
of my fathomable silence
a few gloomy words.

Basking in the hesitant touch
of your hand
I will keep in my world
everything as before
except wherever I placed the hand
will define the boundaries
of your warmth.



The hand III

The mellow sunshine of her hands
the faltering darkness of her hands

her hads like flowers
dew-soaked, serene
her hands like birds
restless to take flight

her hands all alone
drowned in a dream
her hads awaiting
a pair of hands.







--------


jenny_lewis


Radovan's bees

That summer, the sun shot relentless level beams at fields 
so heavy with poppies they slept standing: plums, hung
closer to the ground than anyone could remember, fell 
with a dull implosion into weed-strangled ditches and corn
 
cracked its kernels like pistol shots. Above it all, the bees danced 
in the dazzling air, testing the fragrance of mountain, lake and forest, 
gathering pollen from as far afield as Prijedor and Goražde.
Having been around for 35 million years, they knew everything: 
even why their honey sometimes tasted of blood – children's 
was sweeter than parent's and grandparent's.

In the city, a swarm descended on a tree above the Luda Cuca 
and the local people, worried about being attacked, bought insecticide 
and came to the place, but Radovan said:  "Don't kill the bees - 
bees are blessed, living beings and deserve to be saved." 

© Jenny Lewis, unpublished,  July 2008



Bears nil

People who live in foggy Petropavlovsk- Kamchatky
should know that bears are now encroaching on towns
rummaging in bins and scoffing factory food garbage.

The bears would rather stay at home 
roaming the geysers and snow-covered calderas
of the remote volcanic peninsula they've always shared 
with rare Steller's sea eagles and puffins.

nine time zones away in Moscow
the daily papers carry stories about them
showing pictures of their snarling snouts 
and yellowing tusk-like canines.

They attacked two guards at a geology station
because they were starving - their food supply was gone
poachers have emptied the rivers by netting fish
so no more salmon for the bears to eat:

now, suddenly, they're the Al Capones of the animal world -
sling them a hat and a revolver and each one turns into the Godfather, 
stumbling out of ice-bound thickets with wadded cheeks,
mumbling incomprehensible death threats.

Meanwhile, in the wild far eastern region of Kamchatka
puffins and sea eagles stare out across the wilderness
wondering why it's so quiet: and where all the bears have gone.

© Jenny Lewis, unpublished,  July 2008



A druid sends a postcard home
With apologies to Craig Raine

I have two homes and a chill box bought 
from Marks and Spencer; the chill box 
is to keep Prosecco cold; Prosecco 
is a wine from Italy; Italy is
a romantic place where 
it is always sunny; 
yes it's the same 
as your sun.

I have a trophy wife; a trophy is a cup
with handles you get for winning
a competition; no, she doesn't 
have handles; we have several
holidays each year; last time
we went to Barbados for 
Christmas; I missed 
the mistletoe.

I drive a red 4X4 and a silver BMW; BMW
is a make of car from Germany; Germany 
is where the Anglo-Saxons came from; 
Anglo-Saxons are due to conquer you 
soon; 4X4's are used by the rich 
to clog up roads;  roads were 
invented by Romans, also 
due to conquer you.

I wear the finest  shirts by Gieves and Hawkes; 
they are a firm of tailors in the City; the City 
is London where money is made; it is on 
the Thames, pronounced ‘Temms' 
which is what you first called it; 
it is now so polluted the fish 
are dead; sorry, I know 
you put them there.

Do you still have an allergy to badger fat? 
Have you finally repaired the mead hall? 
Does your cave still flood in March? 
Do you still eat mainly saxifrage 
and seaweed? Do they still 
bring you out in red spots? 
Save me some pignuts. 
I might be back.

© Jenny Lewis, unpublished, September,  2008



Guinivere

I polished it every morning after the jousting, tenderly,
with beeswax smelling of honey and lavender
reflecting on those days when I ran barefoot 
through the meadow over a sea of grass and clover:

in the sky above, voluminous high clouds like ships
that I could jump on and travel to the four corners
of the world where white-gowned angels blew
their trumpets and shouted ‘Arise! Arise!' while

here below, whole banquets of roast peacock stuffed 
with goose, duck, chicken, pheasant, grouse, 
guinea fowl, pigeon, ptarmigan, blackbird, swallow, 
house martin, swift, robin, chaffinch and wren went cold 

while we sat and stared, waiting for a miracle. To pass
time I thought about my lover, the way he removed
his armour piece by piece, always in the same sequence:
gloves, surcoat, hauberk, gambeson and lastly

helmet, revealing the face I loved braided with scars
but still astonishing as the May morning I first saw it:
better by far than his who sent the green knight's
head rolling among gnawed bones of hunting dogs

I wondered then, why I wasn't chosen: I always tried
to get things in the right order – swift, robin, chaffinch
no…swift, chaffinch, wren, robin…gloves, surcoat
or maybe, gloves, hauberk…I lost my gems…my looks

night and morning, I polished the table but they wouldn't 
let me into the secret, only the purest, they said, could see it. 
Now I wash and wash myself, face, hands, feet and always last
the place near my heart where I feel my soul burn.

© Jenny Lewis, unpublished,  July 2008



The following poems are from Mesopotamia about the eponymous World War I campaign, a work in progress by Jenny Lewis.


Mirage

The land and sky trick us with mirages
of enemy troops becoming trestle tables which float
over the ground before turning into camels.

We can't tell how many or how close they are – 
we dive for cover, frightened by bushes:
sunset behind a mound is the flare of shrapnel

over shepherds, watching their flocks
under the first stars.



Qurna

You think of deserts and date palms but this land
floods in winter, temperatures below freezing and sleet
blowing in hard curtains – worse than Wales!

Getting to Qurna was slow going: water, glutinous mud, 
everything sank – guns, supplies, mules; the injured sloshed
along on old AT carts, in agony for lack of morphine. 

On Thursday we built a bridge of boats to reach 
the so-called Garden of Eden – a place of reed hovels, 
lanes littered with rubbish and a keeling 

Tree of Knowledge growing through a shell-pocked roof.
No wonder Adam and Eve left.




--------


#santiago_gamboa#

Sleeping Beauty.s Palace 

by Santiago Gamboa 
 

My name is Bella, and I.m dreaming. I dream and dream in my

palace whose tall windows overlook the multicoloured roofs

of Shibuya. As I dream I talk, about what I see in my mind, I look

for these pictures that are also words and sometimes resemble

smells and fears. This is what I have inside my head, which is as much

as to say, that which is in my heart. My name is Bella or Beja

and even Belha, depending on where I am, because the whole wide

world is my bed. Who am I? Let.s take it step by step. I.m in Tokyo

today, but the first time I lost my virginity . I.ll explain what

.the first time. means in a moment . was at a Guns N. Roses

concert in a football stadium car park in Warsaw, in the back

of a milk van (smelling of milk). The man.s breath reeked of onions

and salami. He was certainly as drunk and probably as high as I was.

Nothing particularly strong was involved, nothing that needed

injecting. You.re already beginning to get an inkling of who I am:

I love men but I hate needles.

Oh God! It was a needle that began this long story, a story you

probably already know, the weird, inordinate comings and goings

that are my life. Let.s see, ahem, how did it all happen? Well, there

were good fairies, and a wicked fairy, and, it goes without saying,

a curse. On reaching my sixteenth year . so the story goes . I would

have pricked my finger on a spindle and slept until a prince

awakened me with a kiss. Yes, that.s more or less how it happened.

The best part, the nicest part is the prince. But the truth is that

I wake up consumed by desire, writhing in anguish, because

the flower that is inside me, the thing that all we women share with

the Virgin . our destiny is to lose it . is reinstated in my dream.

My maidenhead is restored, the membrane grows back, and I find

myself lying there again, wide-eyed, awake and agitated. Oh God!

The Earth moves when a woman is assailed by the desire I feel,

the shock-wave that runs down my spine and embeds itself between

my buttocks, so that all I can do is open my eyes, leave the bed

where I have lain for endless days and nights, and go out into the

world, even as my maidenhead grows miraculously back into place.

My last deflowering was, visually speaking, a pretty intense affair

because the man of the moment was one of the doctors in the

Singapore clinic I woke up in after a twenty-two-week hibernation.

I don.t know who or what he was . an anaesthetist, I.d say, given that

I felt almost nothing . but he released my body and brought it back

to life in a room full of medication, bottles of surgical spirit,

bandages and hypodermic needles. There was even a photocopier.

The doctor plonked me down on the glass and kept on making

photocopies of my bottom squashed against the glass and

the shadowy, cylindrical, scalpel-like weapon thrusting away at its

formless mass . OK, OK, no more details . as I lost my virginity

for, what, the twenty-seventh, the twenty-ninth time? Yes, no more

details because I.m dreaming at the moment and certain nuances

of reality escape me. Reality is my walled garden, the place where

my lovers live, the men who awaken me from my vegetable slumber

and denude me of the treasure that always grows back again and

which, at the end of the day, is no more valuable than an old coin.

While saying this I remembered a man, one of the few who I ever

loved. And what was he called, this prince of mine? I.ve forgotten,

but for the purposes of this dream I.ll give him a name. Let.s say

he was called Lars, and that he was a Danish sailor working

amidships on a Baltic cruise ship. Lars gave me the breath that

brought me back to life as I slept in a cabin. He took me to

his steward.s quarters. Looking through the porthole, he said:

.We.re sailing past a purple island. In the middle of a plain a war is

being fought. Many soldiers are dying. Their helmets rise into the air

and their swords are bloody.. I listened to him while another kind

of blood bathed my thighs, the wound of his body inside mine.

I panted and panted for this man never to stop, never to pull his

sword out of me, for this story of war to last a lifetime. But very soon

something happened, a bell rang and Lars had to go to the upper

deck to make sure that those useless Nordic sailors didn.t sink the

ship. At least, that.s what he said. Leaning out of the porthole, I saw

that it gave onto the kitchen and I understood why I could smell oil

and frying fish, which is the proper thing to eat on board ship, and

why the sea smelt of salt water and fish and plankton and the

flotsam of shipwrecks, and I loved Lars even more fiercely as he did

battle with the storm. But as I was returning to my cabin I heard

shouting and I knew that Lars had fallen overboard, that the waves

were carrying him away . oh what sorrow! . and once more I slept

to forget. I was saddened by the knowledge that the world is always

the same, that nothing ever changes, even when Lars is no more

and I am asleep and we are all dead. Life blossoms again like

a poisonous plant. When I awake there will be other poets

and sailors and milkmen. Some will despair, others will wander

through the Shibuya district after being humiliated.

Life will go on, preserving its bitter flavour until I open my eyes.

When I do, someone will be very happy.

Oh yes. Take my word for it.

What will my next suitor be like? I.ll make a wish: I.d like him

to be middle-aged and a bit more laid-back. I.m tired of young sex



--------


kwame_dawes


INHERITANCE

I

In the shade of the sea grape trees the air is tart
with the sweet sour of stewed fruit rotting
about his sandalled feet.  His skin,
still Boston pale and preserved with Brahmanical
devotion by the hawkish woman
who smells cancer in each tropical wind,
is caged in shadows. I know those worn eyes
their feline gleam riddled with mischief;
his upper lip lined with a thin stripe
of tangerine, the curled up nervousness
of a freshly shaved mustache.  He is old
and cared for.  He accepts mashed food
though he still has teeth--she insists and love
is about atoning for the guilt
of those goatish years in New England.
A prophet's kind of old.  Old like casket-
aged genius.  Above, a gull surveys 
the island, turns loops through the sea and sky--
an even horizon, the bias on which
hangs a landscape, this dark loam of tradition
in which seeds split into tender leaves.

II

I can see the smudge of light colors
spreading and drying quickly in the sun.
The pulpy paper takes the water color,
and the cliché of sea and a fresh beach 
seems too easy for a poem.  He has written 
them all, imagined the glitter and clatter 
of silver cuirasses, accents of crude 
Genoese sailors poisoning the air,
the sand feeling for the first the shadow 
of flag and plumed helmet--this old story 
of arrival that stirred him as a boy, 
looking out over the field of green, 
as he peopled the simple island
with the intrigue of blood and heroes, 
his gray eyes searching out an ancestry 
beyond the broad laughter and breadfruit-
common grunts of the fishermen, pickled 
with rum and the picong of kaiso, 
their histories as shallow as the trace 
of soil at the beach's edge where crippled 
corn bushes have sprouted.  That was years ago;
he has exhausted the language of a broken civilization.
These days he just chips at his epitaph,
a conceit of twilight turning into
a bare and bleak night.  He paints, whistling
	     Sparrow songs while blistering in the sun.

III

The note pad, though, is not blank.  The words start,
thirteen syllables across the page, then seven
before the idea hesitates--these days
he does not need to count, there is in his head
a counter dinging an alarm like the bell 
of his old Smith Coroner--his line breaks
are tidy dramas of his entrances 
and exits, he will howl before the darkness.
This ellipsis is the tease of a thought,
the flirtatious lift of a yellow skirt
showing a brown taut thigh--a song he knows
how to sing but can't line-up the lyrics again--
an airy metaphor of one taken up
by a flippant sea breeze going some place
inland, carrying the image, snagged
by the olive dull entanglement
of a bramble patch. At eight he lays 
the contents of his canvas book bag
on the sand, organizing the still life
in honed stanzas.  He scoops the orange pulp
of papaya relishing the taste of fruit, this bounty
harvested from the ant-infested fragile
tree behind the cottage, a tree that bleeds 
each time its fruit is plucked away.  The flesh
is sunny. He knows the fishermen warn
that it will cut a man's nature; dry up
his sap, that women feed their men pureed
papaya in tall glasses of rum-punch
to tie them down, beached, benign pirogues
heading nowhere.  He dares the toxins 
to shrivel him, to punish him
for the chronic genius of crafting poems
from the music of a woman's laugh
while he chews slowly.  A poem comes to him
as they sometimes do in the chorus
of a song.  It dances about in his head.
He does not move to write it down--it will wait
if it must, and if not, it is probably
an old sliver of long discarded verse.

IV

The old men in the rum shop are comforted
as they watch him limp along the gravel
road, wincing at the sharp prod of stones
in his tender feet, the knees grinding
at each sudden jar--just another ancient
recluse with his easel folded under
his arm, a straw hat, the gull-like eyes
seeing the sea before he clears the hill.
They know him, proud of the boy--bright as hell
and from good people.  There is no shared language
between them, just the babel of rum talk
and cricket sometimes.  Under his waters
he talks of Paris, Florence, barquentines,
Baudelaire, rolling the words around
like a cube of ice--they like to hear
the music he makes with tongue; the way
he tears embracing this green island,
this damned treasure, this shit hole of a treasure.
Sometimes when you don't mind sharp, you would think
he white too, except for the way he hold
the rum, carry his body into the sun
with the cool, cool calm of a drinker.
He say home like it in a book;
hard to recognize when he say home.
Yes, they like it anyway, the way
they like to hear "Waltzing Matilda" sung
with that broad Baptist harmony to a cuatro
plucked, to hear it fill an old time night. 

V

If he is my father (there is something
of that fraying dignity, and the way
genius is worn casual and urbane--aging
with grace) he has lost much over the years.
The cigarette still stings his eyes and the scent
of Old Spice distilled in Gordon's Dry Gin
is familiar here by the sea where a jaunty
shanty, the cry of gulls and the squeak
of the rigging of boats are a right backdrop--
but I have abandoned the thought, the search 
for my father in this picture.  He's not here, 
though I still come to the ritual death watch 
like a vulture around a crippled beast,
the flies already bold around its liquid 
eyes, too resigned to blink. I have come
for the books, the cured language, the names
of this earth that he has invented,
the stories of a city, and the way
he finds women's slippery parts in the smell
and shape of this island, the making
and unmaking of a city through
the epic cataclysm of fire,
eating the brittle old wood, myths dancing
in the thick smoke like the gray ashen debris
of sacrifice.  It is all here with him--
this specimen living out his twilight days,
prodigious as John's horror--the green
uncertain in the half light.  When we meet
he is distant, he knows I want to draw
him out, peer in for clues--he will not be drawn
out, he is too weary now.  He points
to the rum shop, to an old man, Afolabe,
sitting on the edge of a canoe, black
as consuming night.  I can tell
that he carries a new legend in his terrible 
soul each morning, a high tower over the sea.

VI

I could claim him easily, make of him
a tale of nurture and benign neglect;
he is alive, still speaks, his brain clicks
with the routine of revelations
that can spawn in me the progeny
of his monumental craft.  These colonial
old men, fed on cricket and the tortured
indulgences of white school masters
patrolling the mimic island streets
like gods growing gray and sage-like in the heat
and stench of the Third World; return
to the reactionary nostalgia
during their last days--it is the manner
of aging, they say, but so sad, so sad.
I could adopt him, dream of blood and assume
the legacy of a divided self.
But it would ring false quickly; after all
my father saw the Niger carving out
a continent's beginnings; its rapid
descent to the Atlantic; he tasted
the sweet kelewele of an Akan
welcome, and cried at the uncompromising
flame of akpetechi.  The blood of his sons
was spilled like libation into the soil,
and in nineteen twenty six, an old midwife
buried his bloodied navel string, the afterbirth
of his arrival at the foot of an ancient
cotton tree there on the delta islands
of Nigeria.  My blood defines the character
of my verse.  Still, I pilfer (a much better word),
rummage through the poet's things to find the useful,
how he makes a parrot flame a line
or a cicada scream in wind; the names 
he gives the bright berries of an island
in the vernacular of Adam and the tribe.

VII

I carry the weight of your shadow always,
while I pick through your things for the concordance
of your invented icons for this archipelago.
Any announcement of your passing
is premature.  So to find my own strength,
I seek out your splendid weaknesses.
Your last poems are free of the bombast
of gaudy garments, I can see the knobs
of your knees scarred by the surgeon's incisions
to siphon water and blood from bone;
I stare at your naked torso--the teats
hairy, the hint of a barreled beauty
beneath the folding skin.  I turn away
as from a mirror.  I am sipping your blood,
tapping the aged sap of your days while you grow
pale. You are painting on the beach, this is how
the poem began--I am watching you watching
the painting take shape.  I have stared long enough
that I can predict your next stroke--your dip
into the palette, your grunts, your contemplative
moments, a poised crane waiting for the right
instance to plunge and make crimson ribbons
on a slow moving river. These islands
give delight, sweet water with berries,
the impossible theologies 
of reggae, its metaphysics so right
for the inconstant seasons of sun and muscular
storm--you can hear the shape of a landscape
in the groan of the wind against the breadfruit
fronds. I was jealous when at twenty,
I found a slim volume of poems you had written
before you reached sixteen.  It has stitched in me
a strange sense of a lie, as if all this
will be revealed to be dust--as if I learned
to pretend one day, and have yet to be found out.



PROGENY OF AIR

1
The propellors undress the sea;
the pattern of foam like a broken zip
opening where the bow cuts the wave

and closing in its wake. The seals bark.
Gulls call and dive, then soar loaded with catch.
The smell of rotting salmon lingers over the Bay

of Fundy, like a mortuary's disinfected air;
fish farms litter the coastline;
metal islands cultivating with scientific

precision, these grey-black, pink fleshed fish.
In the old days, salmon would leap up the river to spawn,
journeying against the current. They are

travellers: When tucked too low searching for
undertows to rest upon, they often scrape
their bellies on the sharp adze and bleed.

Now watch them turn and turn
in the cages waiting for the feed of
colourized herring to spit from the silver

computer bins over the islands of sea farms,
and General, the hugest of the salmon
has a square nose where a seal chewed

on a super-freeze winter night when
her blood panicked and almost froze.
Jean Pierre the technician and sea cage guard

thinks they should roast the General in onions
and fresh sea water. It is hard to read mercy
in his stare and matter of factly way.

He wears layers, fisherman's uniform;
passed from generation to generation:
the plaid shirt, the stained yellow jacket,

the ripped olive green boots, the black 
slack trousers with holes, the whiskers
and eye of sparkle, as if salt-sea has crystalized

on his sharp cornea. He guides the boat in;
spills us out after our visit with a grunt and grin
willing us to wet our sneakers at the water's

edge. The sun blazes through the chill.
The motor stutters, the sea parts, and
then zips shut and still.


2
Stunned by their own intake of poison,
the salmon turn belly up on the surface;
then sucked up by the plastic piscalator,

they plop limp and gasping in the sunlight.
One by one the gloved technicians
press with their thumb the underside of the fish

spilling the eggs into tiny cups
destined for the Hatchery, anesthetized eyes
glazed shock on the steel deck.

They know the males from the females:
always keep them apart, never let seed touch egg,
never let the wind carry the smell of birthing

through the June air. Unburdened now the fish
are flung back in - they twitch, then tentative
as hungover denizens of nightmares, they swim

the old Sysiphean orbit of their tiny cosmos.
The fish try to spawn at night
but only fart bubbles and herring.

3
On the beach the rank saltiness of murdered salmon
is thick in the air. Brown seaweed sucks up the blood.
The beach is a construction site of huge cement blocks

which moor the sea-cages when tossed eighty feet down.
They sink into the muddy floor of the bay and stick.
There is no way out of this prison for the salmon,

they spin and spin in the algae green netting,
perpetually caught in limbo, waiting for years before
being drawn up and slaughtered, steaked and stewed.

4
And in the morning's silence,
the sun is turning over for a last doze,
and silver startles the placid ocean.

Against the gray green of Deer Island
a salmon leaps in a magical arc,
slaps the metal walkway in a bounce,

and then dives, cutting the chilled water on the other side.
swimming, swimming is General (this is my fantasy)
with the square nose and skin gone pink with seal bites,

escaping from this wall of nets and weed.
General swims up river alone,
leaping the current with her empty womb,

leaping, still instinct, still travelling
to the edge of Lake Utopia, where 
after so many journeyings, after abandoning

this secure world of spawning and living
at the delicate hands of technicians,
after denying herself social security and
Progeny of Air... Cont'd.

the predictability of a steady feeding
and the safety from predator seal and osprey;
after enacting the Sysiphean patterns of all fish,

here, in the shadow of the Connors Sardine Factory
she spawns her progeny of air and dies.



EXCURSION TO PORT ROYAL

In the giddy house  the wind riots on the beach   
we have had lunch  flat moist sandwiches cooked 
by the steaming bus engine   now alone  
abandoned by the other boys  I stare across the roll of sea   
and there is no sign of the passing of time   

no evidence of the decades of progress  
only the scraggly grass   the Institute of Jamaica 
tourist information plaque screwed tight into the 
armoury wall   here is the possibility of journey    
from the quarter deck  I  claim all I survey

on Admiral Nelson's quarter deck the sea sand is black   
shells glint white in the tick of  waves
the water is moving   the horizon shifts    the morning's clean edge
smudges into stark sheets of white light   a thin line of cloud 
moves   the wind toying with its tail  

canon crusted with centuries of rust  black sea sand   dirt points
Admiral Nelson surveys the royal port from his quarter deck   goblet of
gold rum swishing in his unsteady hands   the bitch is singing
from the wooden whore house their a blue yorkshire shanty   her tongue
is heavy on the vowels   his dick is erect

here was Napoleon's nemesis too   long haired bitch with a royal name
teasing the rum to flame in the sweet roast fish air   singing Josephines  
their tongues dancing   in the voice you smell their sex  
Nelson searches the horizon for ship sail  needling its way
across the fabric of green silk looking for war   

the shore crunches   laps   folds   unfolds   ticks   gravels
its undertow back out to the sea weed bed  the last of the rum 
warms sweetly in his pit   the voice sirens across the quad    
and making his giddy way past the armoury   combustible as this 
itch in his pants  Nelson prays for the empire  



CASTING OUT DEMONS

From the cave, a laugh gurgles, surfaces.
You have learned the dialect of my prayers,
a lingo of rules.  You laugh, I cast it out;
they are legion; they keep returning.  
I came to see you in the daytime for despite
my faith, I fear the terror of night, the way
sudden light plays on my nerves.  I imagine your
valley: the gloom, you wondering about
tomorrow: impossible equations.  A week
ago, I dragged you from the toilet.  I thought
I would find you bleeding.  You were only
crying.  I reached.  You held me, crushing me.

We trained you well.  A ball smashed
over the fence and you always were our
emissary, the one to plead.  You always were
the tester of waters, the one to ask the old man 
for the hard things, to face wrath, to face the gloom
we feared and the blow of denial
with the genius art of tears and the open-
faced plea of the perpetual infant.
They never said no.  You think it nothing
now to walk through this, as if
in no time, you will come back grinning
rewarded with the ball in hand, answer ready.
 
I pray over your shining forehead.
Your arms are sinew lined; you are
a thinner version of me and not strange enough
for the necessary detachment of strangers.
It is easier to cast out demons
from strangers because I am unfamiliar
with the line separating personalities,
and my faith is not tested by the logic
of psychology.  It is all spirit and fire.

I mutter my tongues sluggish like the thick
stale air in the room.  I am waiting for them
to catch aflame, grow wings, to make
your head light, clean, to return you to the boy
who used to laugh with me for hours
over a single image of Roman foot soldiers, 
swatted by Asterix and Obelix, their sandals 
suspended like an empty coil of leather—
the look of comic violence—how we laughed.
The boy is gone.  I want to find him, 
but you are growing too quickly for him.  
To return would be to retard all love—the beard, 
the voice, the dropping of fat, the age
in your eyes.  Sometimes I see the fear, 
as if so far in the recess of your cave, 
you are trying to say something,
trying to grant me the faith to believe.



LIGHT LIKE A FEATHER, HEAVY AS LEAD
					Marley, "Misty Morning"

All green light seeping into the morning
the smell of coconut oil and ackee,
lazy reggae pulsing through the thin boards.
This sleeping Sunday morning,
the hymns of the pentecostal church
tucked into the dense green of August Town
swim like prophecy in waves
threading through the faint drum and bass
of the transistor chatting upstairs.

I hear Marley's tinny voice
cut after cut until I ache
from the apprentice cicatrices,
ears now alert to the gravel thin wail
of the original shortass reggae organizer
dubbing me bloody truths from the thin
concentric grooves--round and round
maddening gyre of prophecies,
spiralling mysteries and no clue,
no vision of some monumental journey
over strewn palms fronds and the praise of believers
through holy Kingston--the prophet slips by unnoticed;
(Jamaicans have never understood the hysteria
of Beatlemania, we die, not for pop icons,
but for sweet-mouthed politicians, we die).
This black, glowing vinyl of trapped sound
is all that is left, all that is left
of the rhygin, word-weaving prophet.

My fingers stretch and flow through
the whisper of old revelations like mist,
the rough of the cracked snare and one drop
sound is washed by something of a dream,
I cannot find my way through the smoke.
It is hours before a long-time-coming 
sea breeze, still warm from its journeys
tickles the morning, everything giggles,
everything is light as mute anomie,
while she closes his stiff eyes.


--------


tjawangwa_dema


1. Tonight
Tonight there will be no poets in no café
To speak the blood to green from red
With sweet words and turbaned hair 
To amuse and wipe out the news you heard
Me, I quit that poetry thing
Two lines ago, one love before
These days I sing 



2. The art of listening

The man on the balcony of the company's sixth floor
Says he knows the secret to life
Everyone laughs
Teething vultures biting at the wind
Tie askew
Everyone wishing they knew
What had freed him from the shackles they still clung to
He leaps
Back arched
Perfect stance
Arms wide
Phones flash
The earth shakes
The wind rises knowing there is nothing
Not a thing but it to break his fall
No one laughs 
Not one
Not anymore



3. dreams

Dreams are evil
I prefer nightmares 
They show you what goes on in here
Reflects what goes on out there

Dreams lie
They lead you down a path
Where white chocolate flows undammed 
And mulberries fall unshaken from the trees

Nothing is less faithful
Less real
Or more untrue than a dream

And does every waking moment have to be so hard
I am tired of spending sleepless nights
Chasing hesitant tomorrows biding my time
Just to spend it mending broken things 
That have no wish to be fixed

I will not spin and spin inside this skin
I will not mourn a future I never had
I refuse to bleed myself
For an almost reality rooted in the distant echoes
Of a once familiar voice
Chanting I know I can, I know I can
Because I know I can
Be the girl I am right now
Live the life I have right now
Choose to be the dream I am in right now

Maybe then it won't be so hard 
Just to dream right now



4. STREET VENDOR MELODY

Ssshh listen to her
But no one does and like you
I thought I saw her in art exhibition once
All black and white grayscale shots that hid the hunger in her eye behind the cameras reflection
And I thought, I thought she must be beautiful
As though that were all there ever was
A pretty smile not a hungry mouth
A small waist never an empty belly
Belle of the ball even Sade must not have met this queen because she too is worthy of her own lullaby
Own bittersweet number one hit
Except there's no room here for sorrow 
We just go on same as before
Because someone
We can't quite remember who but someone
Promised salvation is near
And we've been told God gave us these ears so we could hear
That salvation is near
She never says this out loud

Never says this load is not mine to carry
This load is too heavy to carry

Instead she gets up, wakes the dawn
And bathes reflection of self
Dark eyed light of her mother's life
Cradles young one on back and walks out back straight
To her little corner of hell
She's raising her young one sweet at a time
Living from hand to mouth were a thebe literally means life
She's been married to poverty for what feels like forever
Been so long since anything felt right, pure, clean, easy
That she can't even remember ever
She's been eighteen for ten years and still counting
Innocence lost two babies ago
Like it can be found,
Reclaimed within the ice barely keeping cool her chosen produce for the day
And not in her children's eyes
It's seeped into her skin, brown murky reality has 
It's in the way she no longer desires what's not hers 

She no longer says this load is not mine to carry
This load is too heavy to carry

Street vendor sings sweet, sweet melody
Periodically life bends her through its own bittersweet melody

In her world your reality is a joke, love a yoke that chokes
Till she forgets to laugh
So she barters with her God daily
No diamonds on this wish list
Some choices are easier to make than others
Like bread and milk, bread for milk, bread or milk 
That comes with no fist because on her street the women still gather and meet
To count calories to feed their young ones empty bellies
With sun baked promises fulfilled on backstreets and hidden alleys
Not for fame or fortune
These women have never met either
Not for glory neither
They simply sell what they have and when there is nothing left they sell who and what they are 
So today there will be no Sky Blue, CNN endorsement of this beat
Only this poetry from Africa's streets
There are no timekeepers here
No hi I'm home dear
Just life
One heartbeat at a time
sssh
If you listen carefully you just might hear this nightingale speak
Might dare to hear the streets weep sweep this vendor's melody
As life continues to bend her through its own bittersweet broken melody, me lody, me lo dy



5. Seven o'clock news: FREE BONDAGE

Dear Africa I write to you from what used to be the safety of my bedroom
I am looking for my husband Patrick 
Last seen boarding a bus in Harare for Joburg
To carry back our son Farai who lived and worked amongst some people
For some time doing something somewhere in the south
If you have any information any information at all
Please, please come forward
 
This poem is not political
I repeat, this poem is not political 
But fact prevails were sanity fails
Because 400 years ago there were those who died 
For having dared to dream that they could read and eat and breathe and be like you
Yet 400 hours ago there are those who died for having dared to be
On the earth they were
Spoke the tongues they did
Birthed the sons they hid
Beneath fallen breasts sucked dry 
Of blood and oil and rock and milk
I did not mean that this poem was not real
Just that it must not sound social or sexual, political or emotional
Personal let alone human
In turn my words have no complexion
I repeat my words have no complexion
Yet they are just real
And for you that leaves but one question
Have you ever seen God on CNN?
I've only ever seen someone else's definition of Him
Yet I've seen Yahweh, Jehovah, Modimo, Mwali, God, Allah in the eyes of Iraqi Somali, Zimbabwean Malawian mothers wrapping black, brown, yellow gold precious babies in afghans seeped in the red of the siblings before them
Africa in this century we move, we move from earth to mars
Change Universal laws and say what once was no longer is
Still we move from breaking backs to breaking silent bonds
Written before we were born
Humanity is sacred I tell you
 I come sent to remind you
Humanity is you and you, its me, it's beyond boundaries, and colours and yesterdays worries
Over rent and pride, stars and stripes, twenties and tens 
Mounds of earth moved to dig deep to build stadiums built in the shape of a coil
for something as crudely consumable as oil
Not a seen from the eyes of those in free bondage 
They scream
This is the age of bonds and credit, cards and cash to finance your dash of personal slavery
Watch while I dance to the music of broken chains
Listen we moved sssshh we moved from chains on hands and feet
To imprisoning our hearts and minds
I ask you now is this it
Is this the freedom for which so many valiantly fought and others thought humanity no longer sought
Humanity is sacred because it is you and I, 
Humanity is sacred because it is you and I, 
Humanity is sacred because humanity is sacred, 
And the next time you look to your CNN, SABC, DS M or B TV look for the God and the good in you and me
Because humanity is still searching, searching for my husband Patrick
We are silently searching for any remnants of peace, peace, peace, please



6. Just because

Because I know you are going to ask
Where the flowers are 
I have picked roses red and sweet
Left them by the wayside for the birds to eat

Because I know you are going to ask
Where the sweets are
I have made you halwa these hands
Stirred and then spilt what was yours

Because I know you are going to ask
Where I am
I have long left the place I was
To walk slow between the trees 

Where your greedy eye cannot reach me


--------


clare_morgan


Extract 1: from a novel in progress
A Book for All and None
And so he had come home again.   And here he was now, with his life in all its complex action and inaction restored to him.  The house, the library, the garden.  The ghosts.  Chief among these were perhaps the ghosts of himself, the various versions of what he was, accumulating in height and years and there when he turned too quickly.   The steps that he stepped in were his own, the paths through the air – he had already made them.  His likenesses, more or less him to one degree or another, accompanied him.  He saw himself through the glass of time, first brightly and then darkly, diminishing in size and power right back through his babyhood, through the embrace of his parents, back through into the darkness, where he was nothing but a jot.
The other ghosts made themselves manifest only irregularly.  A hand.  An eye.  the sense of a movement at the edge, just out of sight, just out of the main stream.  He could have existed on an island.  He went down to the town from time to time to fetch provisions.  The only things that punctuated his days were the letters from Beatrice.  One then two then three.  He found he was waking up in the morning calculating the likelihood that he would hear from her.  Whether he did or he did not was hardly relevant.  The anticipation stretched him tight over the whole of his existence.  He was stretched so fine you could have held him up to the light and seen through him.  What would you have seen?  Attenuated bone and muscle.  The feathery endings of tendons.  The gelatinous stuff of his eye peering into darkness.  The glutinous convolutions of his grey brain beating, beating, outdone only by the persistent mechanism of his heart. 



Extract 2: from a novel in progress
A Book for All and None
All the images I possessed of Nietzsche were carefully interleaved between plain white sheets of A4 paper.   On the top was Munch's painting of him, the solitary and contemplative figure, rather clerical in his dark coat and with his hands folded.  He is standing on the slope of a hill, a road it looks like, and over his shoulder way down below him is a tiny cluster of buildings, a castle, a church even, or perhaps the angular turret of a European university.  There's a lake too, although the perspective is such that it could be hills, your eye moves from one interpretation to the other, it can never be at rest. 
I took out the second image, inserted in a clear plastic folder so that no inadvertent finger mark should mar its pristine beauty and its clarity.   I handed the picture to Beatrice Kopus who looked at it closely then held it away from her and smiled, a beautiful smile, a joyful smile, that lit up and encompassed everything in the room.
She is very beautiful.   Was she a lover of Nietzsche's?
I took the image back and looked at it.   Louise von Salomé tilted her head away from me and looked out into a distance I had no access to.   Her neck was bare, a tissue of something gauzy was flung over her shoulders.  Her hair, very thick and long and wavy, was thrust up in a bun at the base of her skull from which wisps and tentacles cascaded into the sepia void of the background.  It seemed for one moment as though she turned and looked at me.   No doubt I was superimposing another image in my mind and that is what created the illusion.   But the power of her look, the plea almost, set my heart beating so violently that for a minute I could not speak.



--------


santiago_gamboa

Sleeping Beauty's Palace 


My name is Bella, and I'm dreaming. I dream and dream in my palace whose tall windows overlook the multicoloured roofs of Shibuya. As I dream I talk, about what I see in my mind, I look for these pictures that are also words and sometimes resemble smells and fears. This is what I have inside my head, which is as much as to say, that which is in my heart. My name is Bella or Beja and even Belha, depending on where I am, because the whole wide world is my bed. Who am I? Let's take it step by step. I'm in Tokyo today, but the first time I lost my virginity – I'll explain what "the first time" means in a moment – was at a Guns N' Roses concert in a football stadium car park in Warsaw, in the back of a milk van (smelling of milk). The man's breath reeked of onions and salami. He was certainly as drunk and probably as high as I was. Nothing particularly strong was involved, nothing that needed injecting. You're already beginning to get an inkling of who I am: I love men but I hate needles. Oh God! It was a needle that began this long story, a story you probably already know, the weird, inordinate comings and goings that are my life. Let's see, ahem, how did it all happen? Well, there were good fairies, and a wicked fairy, and, it goes without saying, a curse. On reaching my sixteenth year – so the story goes – I would have pricked my finger on a spindle and slept until a prince awakened me with a kiss. Yes, that's more or less how it happened. The best part, the nicest part is the prince. But the truth is that I wake up consumed by desire, writhing in anguish, because the flower that is inside me, the thing that all we women share with the Virgin – our destiny is to lose it – is reinstated in my dream. My maidenhead is restored, the membrane grows back, and I find myself lying there again, wide-eyed, awake and agitated. Oh God! The Earth moves when a woman is assailed by the desire I feel, the shock-wave that runs down my spine and embeds itself between my buttocks, so that all I can do is open my eyes, leave the bed where I have lain for endless days and nights, and go out into the world, even as my maidenhead grows miraculously back into place. My last deflowering was, visually speaking, a pretty intense affair because the man of the moment was one of the doctors in the Singapore clinic I woke up in after a twenty-two-week hibernation. I don't know who or what he was – an anaesthetist, I'd say, given that I felt almost nothing – but he released my body and brought it back to life in a room full of medication, bottles of surgical spirit, bandages and hypodermic needles. There was even a photocopier. The doctor plonked me down on the glass and kept on making photocopies of my bottom squashed against the glass and the shadowy, cylindrical, scalpel-like weapon thrusting away at its formless mass – OK, OK, no more details – as I lost my virginity for, what, the twenty-seventh, the twenty-ninth time? Yes, no more details because I'm dreaming at the moment and certain nuances of reality escape me. Reality is my walled garden, the place where my lovers live, the men who awaken me from my vegetable slumber and denude me of the treasure that always grows back again and which, at the end of the day, is no more valuable than an old coin. While saying this I remembered a man, one of the few who I ever loved. And what was he called, this prince of mine? I've forgotten, but for the purposes of this dream I'll give him a name. Let's say he was called Lars, and that he was a Danish sailor working amidships on a Baltic cruise ship. Lars gave me the breath that brought me back to life as I slept in a cabin. He took me to his steward's quarters. Looking through the porthole, he said: "We're sailing past a purple island. In the middle of a plain a war is being fought. Many soldiers are dying. Their helmets rise into the air and their swords are bloody." I listened to him while another kind of blood bathed my thighs, the wound of his body inside mine. I panted and panted for this man never to stop, never to pull his sword out of me, for this story of war to last a lifetime. But very soon something happened, a bell rang and Lars had to go to the upper deck to make sure that those useless Nordic sailors didn't sink the ship. At least, that's what he said. Leaning out of the porthole, I saw that it gave onto the kitchen and I understood why I could smell oil and frying fish, which is the proper thing to eat on board ship, and why the sea smelt of salt water and fish and plankton and the flotsam of shipwrecks, and I loved Lars even more fiercely as he did battle with the storm. But as I was returning to my cabin I heard shouting and I knew that Lars had fallen overboard, that the waves were carrying him away – oh what sorrow! – and once more I slept to forget. I was saddened by the knowledge that the world is always the same, that nothing ever changes, even when Lars is no more and I am asleep and we are all dead. Life blossoms again like a poisonous plant. When I awake there will be other poets and sailors and milkmen. Some will despair, others will wander through the Shibuya district after being humiliated. Life will go on, preserving its bitter flavour until I open my eyes. When I do, someone will be very happy. Oh yes. Take my word for it. What will my next suitor be like? I'll make a wish: I'd like him to be middle-aged and a bit more laid-back. I'm tired of young sex fiends who drain me to the last drop. Maybe a man who, even as I speak, is wading through tall reeds and mindless multitudes, striding confidently beneath the neon lights of a ghost town like this one, like Tokyo seen from Shibuya, on his way to my palace where he will utter the sweet words I long to hear. When he has said them I will see his eyes, two spheres brimming over with feeling, and inside them, in his gaze, I will find life, and I will be deflowered anew. As you can see, I don't ask for much. I just want someone to take me in his arms – something real, something furiously real that gives me some relief when it happens. 


--------


pavan_varma


Gulzar
translated from Urdu by Pavan K Varma

BOOKS

They peer from the
Panes of locked cupboards,
They stare longingly
For months we do not meet
The evenings spent in their company
Are now passed at the computer screen.
They are so restless now, these books
They have taken to walking in their sleep
They stare, longingly

The values they stood for 
Whose ‘cells' never died out 
Those values are no more found in homes
The relationships they spoke of
Have all come undone today
A sigh escapes as I turn a page
The meanings of many words have fallen off
They appear like shriveled, leafless stumps
Where meaning will grow no more
Many traditions lie scattered 
Like the debris of earthen cups
Made obsolete by glass tumblers

Each turn of the page
Brought a new flavor on the tongue,	
Now a click of the finger
Floods the screen with images, layer upon layer
That bond with books that once was, is severed now
We used to sometimes lie with them on our chest
Or hold them in our lap
Or balance them on our knees,
Bowing our heads as in prayer
Of course, the world of knowledge is still there,
But what of
The pressed flowers and scented missives
Hidden between their pages,
And the love forged on the pretext
Of borrowing, dropping and picking up books together
What of them?
That, perhaps, shall no longer be!



GREEN MOMENTS

When tired of winging around
The white eagle descends
It speaks to the mountains
Of trees that once were.

There a tall deodhar had stood once
It would tie the clouds to its leaves
Like a turban
Or wrap them around like a shawl
Holding the breeze
Swaying, it would say,
If I was not rooted
I would waft away with you!

And there, a little ahead of the keekar
Was a sheesham
The two would fight a great deal
But the truth was that
The keekar was envious of the sheesham's height!
When the wind whistled through the leaves of the sheesham
The birds on its branches would imitate the sound

There was a mango tree too
For years a koel
Would alight on it as it flowered
Nearby were a few gulmohars, of which only one remains
It spends its time assuaging the pain
Of names gouged on its body

And here a neem tree, in love with the moonlight
Drunk with joy its leaves would turn blue

A little further away, on the next mountain,
A rustle of pines could be heard breathing deeply
But today not one can be seen on that mountain

I have not seen but it is said
That in the embrace of that valley lived a champa 
Larger in size than the big banyan tree
Lush, milk-white sap oozing from its cuts
The poor champa was taken away
From this jungle in so many parts

Sitting on a barren tree, the white eagle
Tells the mountains old stories
Of trees that once were.
Trees that stunted men felled
Cut into pieces, and burnt.



A DAY TO SPEND

Every day I am given a full day to spend
But every day someone snatches it away
Grabs it away from my grip

Sometimes it drops off from my purse
And I do not even hear it fall
Even a good day I forget thinking it was bad!

Then there are those who collar me and claim my day!
‘It is a debt owed by generations before you,
You must pay the instalments –

Others forcibly mortgage it saying:
Take a few moments to spend now
The rest we will credit to your remaining life
And settle accounts when required

I would love to have
A full day to myself, if only for once
And to spend that one full day with you
Is what I truly desire



--------


anna_moi

Copyright  Gallimard

translated by Anna Moi and Rana Dasgupta 

BLACK RICE

extract from the novel  
      In the middle of the night, I finally identified the nature of the noise. Not really a noise, the sound was barely perceptible . repetitive, like the echoes of a dream. But it is not a dream, because I am not sleeping.

      The others sleep. Around me, silence is frail after the tumult of the day, the slamming of doors, the clanking of chains and the cries. Through the silence, I heard the humming. It was barely audible, and obsessive. How many of us heard it that night, and after, every night for one hundred nights, three hundred nights or thirteen hundred nights?

      I could describe the sound by comparing it to the rustle of dead leaves brushed by the wind. Also the wind could be heard sweeping the top of the cashew nut tress. But these gusts were out of rhythm with the other sound, an insistent cadence at times slightly syncopated.

      I could also smell the sweet scent of ripe fruit of the cashew nut which extended below it like a question mark. Once the door banged shut, I examined the yard through a crack in the battant and gazed at the splendor of the leaves of the cashew nut, thick and fat.

      Many interrogations about all that happened since our arrival; but tonight were still pending, the first night, I searched only for the origin of the distant purr.

      The cement block which is my bed is cold against my back. We are four, two on the block and two on the ground, in a room of five feet by eight. less than three square feet per person. It is cold. I warm myself again by leaning against the back of my sister Tao. She is sleeping. From time to time she grinds her teeth but I am the only one to hear the light scratching of her molars. We are exhausted. The night before, in the bilge of the ship, no one slept. Soaked by sea spray and thrown against each other, the passengers of the ship spend a restless night. Less than an hour after departing from Vung Tau, when the ships leaves the bay to enter the South China Sea, which flows into the Pacific Ocean a little further down, the waves swell and heave. The soft rocking become violent. The bilge, at first merely damp, is soon covered by pools of water as the sea insidiously seeps in, creeping over our heels, then our knees and finally our thighs. When the water reached the waist, several women whimpered and others let out more strident cries like a swarm of insects in distress. The hub-bub was intensified by the jangling of chains and the babies crying. Only two babies. Four hundred women. Two hundred men. I will not forget what the men did that night. Their arms knotted horizontally over the water level had created a litter to hold the bodies of the weaker ones. The men were so thin, following months or near-starvation, and it was nearly impossible to imagine they were able to cradle in their arms, for hours, the lifeless women.

      I am the youngest. I am fifteen. The men offered me their arms but I said no.

      "Guard your strength", they called.

      "Guard your strength for the others", I answered.

      Tired, yes, I am. But at the age of fifteen I feel invincible.

      The ordeal caused by water was not by followed by fire but by silence. No one was permitted to speak. Even cries were treated as words and were reprimanded. Neither I nor my sister cried.

      After warming myself against her back, I stretched out on the floor. Overhead the oblong design of the cross bars were partially obscured by the darkness, but my eyes picked them out. Twenty cross bars transected by one in the middle.

      It is my first night in a tiger cage of Poulo Condor prison, and the sound that I hear is the Pacific Ocean. 

      The door of our cell is made of wooden slates. A moonbeam pierced the joints on the left side of the door. All day long, Tao and I had bickered over who would take the coveted position to gaze through the crack at the vast scene outside, the landscape outside our cell. In truth, the crack in the door revealed little: one or two large and thick leaves, some limestone shards on the wall opposite, the slight curve of a bell.

      Now that Tao was asleep, I had the envied spot to myself, but the moonlight did not clearly reveal the leaves swelling with sap.

      It was the first time in four months that we are allowed to sleep in the dark. In the communal cell of the former women.s prison in BiÃ Hoa, on the mainland, the fluorescent lights had blushed us night and day. I never got used to it. Sleep was interrupted by interrogations and, worst of all, by the erratic blinking of the neon lights.

      If it were not for the odor, I would doubtlessly have been able to sleep. After making us discard our shoes and chaining our feet to the iron bars of the cell at the edge of the cement block, our bed, the guards left us alone.

      We could detect the odor as soon as we entered through the metal fate at the entrance to Camp nÂ4, formerly Camp nÂ3 and recently renamed Camp Phu Hai, the Camp of the Sea of Prosperity. The stench had infiltrated the rows of kitchen gardens cultivated by prisoners. Past the sundecks and the little gate with a tinkle bell just before the tiger cages, it became overwhelming.

      The stink came primarily from the latrines: lidded wooden buckets. The chains didn.t interfere with our movements inside the tiger cage, and the bucket was placed near the entrance to clear the greatest possible rest area. Tao and I, on our block, are privileged. The other women slept on the ground.

      "Sometimes, they leave us with buckets for weeks, so of course there is some overflowing, says Phuong.

      "What can we do about this?

      "Nothing, nothing at all."

      I felt slumber starting to sink in, at last. Little by little, my nostrils filtered the disgusting mold and replaced it with the discharge of decaying fruit. No one had gathered it and the fruit had rotted. Even rotten, it carried for the longest time a smell of summer.

--------


jane_draycott


X-ray

[the] Airport here will test a new federal screening system
that takes X-rays of passengers' bodies – AP, 2006

It is late. At the gates to her city 
she calls your name, yes you, moon moth 
pinned here on the pages of this open book.
So much yourself and not like you at all.

The night is carbon. You are long past sleep. 
Here at the crossing point you meet
her scanning eye in silence, though 
there's much more you could tell.

How you played the violin each night 
at gunpoint, how you sang among the dead
in Thrace, how you come as a messenger, 
bring news from another place.		



Whiskey

A match struck
in the house of ice. 

Deep-sea flame fish
calling, the heart

harpooning. Something 
in the dark is flashing. 

Gold in the blood -
veverything you know.	

The fire on the little sandy beach.
The bear at the window.

No-one escapes.



The Square

Across the square a woman is looking at me
from a window, the shadow of the room she's in
pressing her like a flower towards the light.

In her sleeveless linen dress she is beautiful,
a cool candle in the vast dark glass,
like my mother in a time before I knew her.

Between us, a river of tourists, faces lifted
to the great bronze horses stepping off 
into some other air we cannot see.

Like a lover across a room I return her look 
but she in her eyes is saying It's too late now
and it is: I might as well be invisible.

Even if I crossed the square and found 
that room she's in, she would be gone for sure.
She isn't interested in me any more.



Pass
for Holly

We calculate you´re two corners away by now,
first time alone in the car, navigating through
the twelve big houses at the edge of town, 
the fallow field where once in a blue moon 
a spring appears like a flying fish at sea.
The winter night´s as clear as cooling glass
but you accelerate away from us too fast 
to see the stars, the arrows on the ground.

Your music steers you on a sail of sound, 
you are on fire. Your hands are Mercury,
your heart and eyes the Sun. You plough
the top road like a submarine – we try in vain
to visualise your course, the unlit shipping lanes,
the shoals of stars. We cannot see you now.



After the Meal

After the meal (for this is the hour) comes 
	the helicopter. Each person's plate 
wiped clean as an ice-field, miraculous flight

to rise like a mythical insect over the mountains,
	the legendary gardens hanging like hair,
 then lower one's body and winch down the post.

This is the hour when husbands and wives 
	at their tables gaze at each other amazed
like looking at photos of earth from the air

the miles of mangrove, its jewelled brocade
or their own letters found in their parents' effects
or the wonderful clothes they once wore.

This is the hour in the high alpine restaurants 
	when lovers of many years standing
wonder if they have ever existed at all.



In the same way

In the same way, a man might leave a house
at dawn, closing the door as quietly as he can
(though still it echoes in the street like pack ice
or the trigger of a gun) and launch himself
across the local street-map on his bike.

He rides all day and night, he rides for years,
the stony tracks, the hills, the deep crevasses
and the bright blue light.  Until one evening
like a total stranger on a pitch black road
the land puts up a hand and draws its knife.

So when he does return it's with a deep map
of the landscape carved into his face
as its catastrophes are locked into his voice.
All night the hills and crushing ice roll under him.
Sleep now, nobody can understand everything.



--------


fred_daguiar

NAMING THE DEAD
Extract from a novel

I want my green fingers back, bring back, bring back, not these stumps. Touched a seed, tucked it in shallow, muddy ground and it sprouted. Fingers found plants and tried to unlock their remedies. My hands trembled with a heartbeat in every finger. I mapped the flora around El Dorado. If a plant brushed my leg as I hurried from one chore to another &#8212; wash this, scrub that, patch such and such with thimble and needle and not much thread or cook something up from nothing &#8212; I stooped beside it and scooped some leaves or twigs off it, apologized for the theft and stashed the prize in my apron pocket for study later. Of course later never came so as I stirred a pot I examined leaf and stem, sniffed the trace of balm, tipped my tongue at it for a tittle-tattle taste of paradise. A speck of paradise on my tongue-tip in the green heart of this jungle. If not paradise then what, a burnt tongue from that unknown sap, a rash on my tongue for tickling my curiosity. Because, because, because I cannot help myself. My mother told me to, not to. I held onto the hem of her dress and what she did I told myself I would do, so yes, she told me to, not to. To speak only when spoken to. Not to whistle, only men whistled. To keep an eye, not the spare eye in the back of my head, that was for danger, but one of my two lazy eyes on my body as I girlied myself about the world so that I would always see how I looked to strange eyes, eyes not mine, how much of my skirt was above my knee, how little was left to ride up my thighs.
I died in the jungle, a stone's throw from El Dorado, in the middle of nowhere. I did not die alone but surrounded by the sounds of all the others, many, many others, dying around me, with me, for me, because of me. They died for me just as I died for them and because of them. I left their bodies scattered and heaped all over Smithtown, the small town we raised in his name. I died on my feet. I walked backwards away from that place knowing nothing, not when I spun on my heels to face the right way out of there nor with any feeling for how I walked through jungle that must have tripped and bumped me along, until I came to a river as wide as the sea. 
The high tide striated the river, made it resemble bundles of light, falling through bamboo. Light in layers or a ladder, water for rungs, wrung water, water's twisted cloth, bolts of cloth, stacked, tiered, heaped water. It looked so that I could walk on it, climb it and escape the jungle and end up high in the highest current of the water. Buoyed away by pure swaths of light disguised as a high tide. A raft of bones built for light travel. And that was how I walked into the river and walked under it too and had to be plucked out by fishermen who took me for a madwoman because I chuckled or choked or both. Three of them held me down and tied me in one of their nets for fear I might scratch or bite. But I was not laughing. I merely chuckled at the fact that the water deceived me, like everything else about our jungle paradise and made me think I could climb it to some other safer place. My chuckle of recognition, acknowledged an inviolable fact. I was the water but the water was not me. I was the forest but the forest would always remain the forest and have nothing to do with me. I was not in paradise though something of paradise remained hidden in me. Certainly not a laugh as the fishermen thought. 
When was it I last laughed? I mean really guffawed until my midriff hurt and I cried? There in the jungle washed by star, moon and insect-light. In Smithtown dropped in the middle of the world's biggest garden. The meeting began late at night as usual - Smith was a night owl, a late riser who seemed afraid to fall asleep. We sat on aluminum folding chairs arranged in two tight rows of ten, twenty rows deep with a corridor between the two sets of rows. Others, mostly children, squatted on tarpaulin or a spare blanket around the edges of the rows of chairs. All of us faced a plinth covered with cloth and furnished minimally with a small round table on which rested a jug of water, a couple of glasses and Smith's much-thumbed, dog-eared bible, and next to the table, a high chair. Smith sat in the high-backed chair and looked too small for it, rather than the grand royalty he meant to simulate. He held a microphone with the stand beside him in case he needed to rest the mike and dry his face and take a drink. Mostly there was someone nearby to take the mike and hand him a towel or glass of water. A large fan placed strategically behind him and slightly to the side kept him cool and guaranteed the front rows of the tent would be filled early to garner some of that free air. Bare bulbs burned on long cords strung throughout the corrugated zinc-roofed structure open to the elements on all sides. A generator drowned the insect noises and competed with the arguments of Tom Smith booming on the P.A. As stars played hide and seek behind clouds, fireflies flicked their lamps on and off. As the P.A. blasted the dark the multitude of night insects going about their business must have taken in a little of what Smith said. Insect-brethren. 
He ran his hand through his black hair lifting it off his forehead and slicking the thick, wet mop of it back onto his scalp. He fixed his hard brown eyes on a child seated on the floor with her two siblings and made her squirm. His stare was not vacant but the kind of stare that provided thinking with a framework. He asked her what she thought of her parents who were back in California and agitating to get her, her brother and her sister out of Smithtown. The parents hired lawyers and sent several writs to Georgetown ordering Smith to surrender the three children to the authorities. She was a feisty little thing. I nearly slapped her once as was the habit among adults in their dealings with children at Smithtown, for countermanding my instructions during gardening duty. I kept my arm by my side determined not to be like all the rest. I liked Gina's pluck. Though very thin and short she never failed to hoist up on tiptoe and stick her face into the faces of other children who threatened her. And she willingly gathered plants for me helped by her brother Ben and her sister Clara. Though she was in the middle of them and smallest of the three she ordered both of them around as if she were the eldest. Her sense of herself as the best defender of the family in the absence of her parents persisted though she knew every adult in the Temple was meant to be her new family. 
I told her and her brother and sister Anancy the Spiderman stories, as they were told to me by my father, and as I remembered them or failed to in which case I simply made up the lost details. I storied them to keep them at their chores and by my side and therefore out of trouble. They, in turn, went on leaf hunting missions for me and brought back stacks of leaves, most known to me but sometimes a few mysteries turned up. Gina - we used first names, knowing that our last name had to be Smith - took the mike from Tom and barked into it so loudly we sat upright and attended her as if freshened by her appearance when, in fact, each of us was near collapse from working all day and listening to him into the small hours. She seemed about 9 or 10. I say this because exact ages were anathema in Smithtown, gauged roughly by cosmic events or shared calamities with all birth certificates and such proof of citizenship of our former lives burned, shredded or surrendered to Smith and never seen again. I know she had not had her first period and she was spared for this reason from the more arduous chores of womanhood. She held the mike with her right hand and jammed the knuckles of her left hand into her hip. She said about her former parents, "I want to tear them apart, the fuckers. The fucking no-good stirrers. I want to string them up by their fucking heels. Excuse my language, Father," (he nodded for her to proceed), "but I hate those two bitches. They can kiss my ass." She flicked up her dress. She wore nothing under her dress. Her bold gesture brought renewed waves of laughter. "I hope they rot in hell. If they came to get me I would kill them first and then kill myself."
This is where I laughed my loudest. I do not include when I first heard him preach back in California. I cried back then more than I laughed, though it was for joy. This Guyanese jungle setting never rang with so much laughter. If our laughter could harvest fruit the trees would be stripped bare. If our ululating were a season, say the winters back home in the North, then all the land would be covered in snow. I cried with laughter. Everyone howled and clapped and stamped their feet and so the ovation went on long after Gina returned the mike to Tom and resumed her place on the floor next to Ben and Clara. 
Tom Smith called her back to the stage to take a bow and he kissed her on both cheeks and told us she was a child but she should be seen as an example by all of what it takes to be a member of this community and one of his followers. 
It takes balls, he said, pointing with the mike at little Gina. And it took a child to show us the kind of balls we need to survive in this place and against all our enemies. My laughter would have subsided were it not for this addendum of Smith's &#8212; Someone get this child a pair of panties. 
This was the last time I really laughed. I am ashamed because I know I laughed for all the wrong reasons. Even as I laughed I knew what should really take the place of laughter I could never show, not in my body. My body could not contain it. I do not mean straightforward tears but a giving over of the body to despair from which there would be no turning back. 
In Smithtown no one was allowed to cry without the express permission of Smith. Tears at a funeral, fitting. Tears of joy at the height of his sermons, great. Tears of depression or frustration with camp life, not if you valued your skin. I buried my tears face down in my pillow. Look at us in the night and you might wonder why so many of us spent long periods with our faces pressed into the pillow. I am sure I was not the only one who said into my pillow what could never be uttered within earshot of another person and cried and screamed too. 
Smith stood while he made Gina sit on his throne. He picked up where she left off with warnings about insiders who were now outsiders and perhaps more of a threat than any other person, lawyer or government. He defined those persons as most despicable of all Temple enemies. They knew better and turned their backs on wisdom. They learned all there was to know about the beast and opted to support him and work against the Temple. Gina began to nod off on the throne so the nurse shook her and made her re-join her brother and sister in the audience. Smith slumped into the chair and defined lawyers as bloodsuckers, tapeworms, parasites. His speech slurred and he paused for a long time between sentences. He repeated himself and did not seem to know he had said that thing only a moment ago. He repeated it almost verbatim and dwelled on each phrase with the same sense of discovery and revelation. 
"A government walks in on us and pretends it cares about us, about how we live but it is here to spy on us, to criticize us, everyone can criticize, and to destroy us. But we will not go away. You hear, that, ears in the night, eyes in the night. A government walks in on us and pretends, pretends it cares. About us. Cares about how we live but it is here to spy on us, to criticize us, everyone can do that, criticize, and it wants to destroy us. But will we go away? No. You hear that, ears on the night, eyes in the ears of the night." He stopped talking and his head drooped until his chin touched his chest and we knew the night was over because he was over for the night. Sleep for him was death in life, hell on earth, his worst tormentors given free reign with him. So he kept his eyes open and kept us up with him until he had to be carried sleeping in his chair to his bed. 
Four men shouldered that throne with Smith slumped in it, followed by the nurse and hygienist, both of whom tucked him in. We sat and watched the chair with its precious cargo leave the tent. Only after he was out of sight we moved, scuttled to various sleeping quarters counting on the fingers of one hand how very few hours of darkness remained, how late into the night he talked, so late it was well into the start of another day, and hating the idea of waking before we reached our beds.  
We talked about Gina's public outburst for days. It saved her many hours of dull chores and she won a few pairs of decent underwear. Ben and Clara waited on her. That week her name and her brother's and sister's, appeared on the timetable next to mine making me responsible for their personal hygiene. I cut their finger and toe nails, cleaned their ears and combed their hair. I tried to get Gina to deliver a few more nuggets of wisdom but she squirmed and fidgeted like all children subjected to a morning of hair-plaiting and I ended up reprimanding her like all the others. "Keep still, child. How you expect me to tidy your wild head if you keep slipping around like an eel." 
"You hurting me." 
"If I really hurt you child you would know about it." 
To stop myself painting us both into an ugly corner I called her sister and brother over and launched into an Anancy tale. I put aside her night in the spotlight as an aberration. 
She remained feisty even when she approached me for a story. 
"Do you have any Anancy stories for us today?" 
She asked as if I had a store of them on me and it was my duty to give them away before they decomposed because of my neglect and left a bad smell on me.  She seemed to think she did me a favor by providing me with a ready and willing audience at no cost to me and at much inconvenience to her going by her folded arms and frown and the slightest trace of a smirk in the corner of her mouth. She was ripe for a slap and when I felt like dishing out a slap to one so young, a common practice here, I knew it was time to conjure Anancy or send her on one of my leaf gathering errands to add to my plant collection. Everyone soon returned to treating Gina like another pair of hands to help me weed the vegetable and herb garden or help reduce the mountain of laundry, dirty dishes and litter. We could not afford to spare her even in her gifted state, the rare gift of talking in the spirit of Smith. We needed even her little hands in Smithtown, to stave off the rain and humidity, always a fight against ever- encroaching vegetation which moved faster than I could study it, or come to grips with weeds, and mud when it rained, or from overnight moisture, omnipresent mud from more wet than dry days and never enough hands around.
We made mud pies. We could have cooked with mud. It inveigled its way into everything. The children wore a film of muddy water, their second skin. When I scraped Ben, Clara and Gina's scalps, mud speckled their shoulders and lodged between the teeth of the comb. I brushed the comb with every five strokes on a scalp or rattled it in a basin of water. The children screeched and squirmed without exception and I launched a story to settle them. 
I tasted mud too. We salted and peppered it for a flavor other than its mineral promise. The sun baked it and it cracked like the bottom of our feet and the palms of our hands. It squelched when stepped in and grabbed the ankles as if to keep us in it. Patience mud, you will have us all soon enough, so many of us you won't know what to do with us all, where to put us for safekeeping for another day of feasting on us or how to arrange our countless bones other than in a heap. 
The children played in water after a downpour. They stripped bare and flung handfuls of mud at each other. They stopped to catch their breaths only to daub mud on each other and waited around like statues for the mud to dry into a cast on them. Mud people. The mud hardened and resembled ashes. They did not want to crack the mud that encased them so the children walked around straight-legged and with arms stuck out beside them, the ghosts of themselves. 
We caught them and wanted to beat them for it, for playing dead. Did they not know how hard we fought to free ourselves of mud? They knew and yet they did this mud dance to show us that they did not care to fight the mud but preferred to join forces with it. We scrubbed them hard until they were raw skin and polished bones once again. Do not tempt fate, I told Gina, and Clara and Ben, who followed her and did her bidding. You cannot toy with Death. And they looked puzzled. What? They asked. What did we do? You are playing with fire. This confused them no end. What fire? Clearly mud was nothing like fire. 
Gina understood. I threw her my most fierce look, knitted brows, unblinking eyes and pursed lips. She did not do me the honor of looking sheepish like the others. She hardly blinked. I shouted at her more than I reprimanded her two siblings. My look was an order for her to show me a little fear. 
Be respectful of me, Gina, or pay a higher price later on. Cleanliness is next to Godliness. Mud on your body is a sign of a corrupt soul. We fight to remove the taste of mud from our mouths, and what do you do? You roll in it. You show us you do not care. We have to walk away from sin, not invite it into our lives. 
I wanted to say more, throw in a little science about flesh-eating bacteria and fungus but I stopped myself. I had said too much already. I folded my lips in my mouth and bit on them, tightened them against a spigot of tears. For I heard how much I sounded like one of his sermons and we were full of his sermons, three square meals of them a day and every scrap on our plates chewed thoroughly before we swallowed or else, and every plate spotless. Smith fed and full, brimful and near bursting or face Daddy's wrath. 
We needed one example of his iron hand, just one. At one of his marathon evening gatherings Smith asked just about the most elderly man at the Temple, Old John, why he wanted to go to Georgetown. It was long past midnight and we listened in and out of sleeping upright with our eyes open. A few of us held these false poses of attentiveness and leaned unwittingly by degrees until we had to be nudged upright by someone beside us who we fell against or who wished to spare us the embarrassment of having Smith or one of his cohorts shout at us to pay attention.  
The mosquito coils dotted everywhere, burned down to the stubs. Moths whittled away at the light bulbs. But even they began to drift away. When the old man stuttered and said he wanted to see the capital of the country that was his new home before he faced his maker, a few of us nodded. We could understand that, the last wish of an ancient man. Old John seemed older than the hills. No one among us had memories that predated his existence. We were positive Smith would grant it and move on to the next request or case. Old John joined Smith from the beginning.  Some of us even called him Father, a moniker reserved for Smith. Though crooked in body his long years held out the promise of the durable nature of Smith's teachings; that he, Smith, could retain the loyalty of Old John for so long was a measure of the truth of his message. 
But when Smith said to Old John, stooped over with rheumatism and osteoporosis, and who looked up at Smith in a sideways fashion of sticking his chin up, if he would care to tell everyone the real reason why he wanted to go to Georgetown, and not the bullshit excuse of a last rite that might fool some uneducated idiot off the street but was unworthy of an address to his spiritual leader and material provider, a lightning bolt ran through the tent and struck us all to attention. 
The old man stooped even more and dropped his chin. Let us hear you, Smith bellowed. And with that Smith sprang from his seat and thrust the mike into Old John's knobbed hand. "Go on," Smith shouted at the top of his voice to compensate for the lack of a mike. He did not seem angry right then only keen to be heard by everyone. Old John's labored breaths boomed over the P.A. He sighed. The trap could not now be evaded. To deny it would be to call Smith a liar; admit to it and he may as well confess to a cardinal sin, that of desertion. We watched him. He seemed even more contorted than before. As he thought through his options each word played on his crumpled spine in jolts of his body. "I can't hear you," Smith bellowed. This must be what it was like to think for yourself rather than have Smith think for you.   
I try to think outside of his teachings and I come up with a blank, a sky empty of stars, moon, cloud, birds. I draw blank. No Smith, no me. No Father in my head, no head on my shoulders, just a shell for a brain. His words rise up in me and form clouds in my head. Birds sing his praise. Stars paint the sky. I frame them into sentences and I sound like Father, I stick to Smith, his sounds for my no-sound brain: an opalescent sky at night, a cloud city drifting by. Old John said, Yes, sir, Father, I wanted to go to Georgetown but now I want to stay here. I have everything that I need or could ever want right here. Don't need no other place. No, sir. Made a mistake in my thinking. I slipped up. Sorry, Father. 
And with that the old man fell to one knee and lowered his head. Smith jumped off the stage and grabbed the mike from his gnarled hand. 
"You slipped up, did you? What do you think would happen to this place if I slipped up? What do you think would happen to each and everyone of you if I caught a little whimsy to go on a jaunt to Georgetown or some other sin bin and maybe never come back? You know what? I do not have to spell it out for you. Your ruin and my damnation. Your doom on earth and my doom in hell. You can slip up. I, sir, on the other hand, have no such luxury. You know what happens to people who slip, don't you? Do you?" 
"Yes, sir, they fall." 
"That's right, they fall. And you, my oldest friend have fallen from a terrible height." 
Smith beckoned a couple of his helpers over to his side. Two young men of a troop who carry out his physical work, his beatings and lockups, his water immersions and his prolonged verbal assaults for any backsliders, slippers and sliders among us. 
"Take him to the well. You will spend the rest of the night in the well." 
"Please Tom, no." 
"I am Tom now to you, am I? What happened to Father, Daddy? Take him away. I hope the water will mend your ways." 
Smith's two lieutenants frog-marched Old John from the tent. His wife, Jemima, a woman even older than his mid-80s who always hummed hymns while she worked, fainted, and a few women gathered her up and carried her from Congregation Hall as our meeting place was gloriously known. It took a minute of Smith shouting at us to pay attention to him and not to the wayfarers in our midst as he referred to Old John and his wife, Jemima, for Smith to get us to settle and shake off our involuntary shivers. 
His judgment on the old man made my flesh creep and crawl. I belonged to Smith, we all did, and this was what he chose to do with us, his children. An army of ants burrowed just below the surface of my skin. I heard nothing for the rest of that night though Smith shouted at us and locked eyes with me more than once. I slept with my eyes wide open. I looked awake, open and receptive to Smith, but I had shut down all engines in my body, closed all my pores to the world. 
My head summoned the catalogue of my plants and a clump of purple-headed lupins poised on a rock revolved in my mind's eye and I sniffed and stroked and peered at it under an imaginary microscope and lifted a sample of it with tweezers and held it to a bright bulb, any and everything to take my mind off Smith. I placed Anancy in the country's army, pictured him as a thief, disguised him as a rabbit, fixed him in a pose as the North Star, each leg a ray of light shot from the body of the star, or Anancy caught in a lie and shamed in front of the entire village, or at a banquet and eating humble pie.  Plant and Anancy, save me. 
My neighbors on both sides of me shook me by the shoulder and nudged my lolloping head until I jumped out of my seat. They carried Smith out and I could still hear him sermonizing which could only mean I replayed an earlier session of his to compensate for my absence from his current one. I filed out with the rest of the congregation and we tried not to talk about the old man in the well. We kept our mouths shut since it was impossible to know who to trust. Any show of sympathy for him might be reported as opposition to the judgment of Smith and no one opposed Smith, not within the confines of the camp. I took to my bed but lay in the dark and listened to my breathing and the twists and turns of others settling in for the few hours of grace left before morning. These hours flew by ordinarily. Before we knew it daylight was shaking us in our bed to abandon the Devil, idleness, and rise and shine in the name of the Lord. And so they found me, the chacalaka birds or bush alarm clocks of our settlement, those allotted day-duty, the enforcers who made sure all the beds were vacated by everyone but the infirm, my eyes wide open and still in need of a shake to stir me from my stupor. A handful of mint leaves in my hand, squeezed for their perfume and then kept in my grip through the small hours, the quiet, and then start of dawn life, gripped all night to remind me of something that was still mine. 
A part of me held the hand of Old John as they lowered him into the well and the rest of me kept him company throughout the long night of damp bones and cold cramps. I told him Anancy stories and he corrected my mistakes and I named the plants that might ease the stiffness in his back and slow down the brittleness of his bones, the flesh folding with them. We talked and cuddled for warmth and in the dark watched each other for the shine in our eyes. And when they pulled him up in the morning and he looked fast asleep and no one could rouse him from his slumber that was because his cold skin and stiff bones told another story for he and I floated down that well and rather than soak all night and freeze we found a portal and squeezed through it and out of this place.  


--------


bina_sarkar_ellias

Gallerie
A Journey of Ideas. 1997-2008

International Gallerie was conceived by one person's simple, single-minded belief in the rich, diversity of the world's cultures and the powerful universality of ideas. In an increasingly cynical world, the idea captured the imagination of a core group of people comprising design and print professionals, photographers, writers... and advertisers. 

Encouraged by this support, its founder-publisher and editor, Bina Sarkar Ellias, launched the first issue of International Gallerie in July 1997. That issue was an instant success - not in numbers, but in terms of its quality of readers. The inaugural issue and subsequent issues went on to win no less than 10 national and international awards for excellence. 

What began as an arts and literary journal that focused on creative excellence worldwide, soon evolved into a socio-cultural forum on global issues - stringing art, music, theatre, cinema, poetry and travel into a cohesive theme. 

Opposing violence, for example, in the 3rd issue. Or believing in a world without divides - race, caste, ethnic - in the 4th. The 5th issue was dedicated to the War Child. The 6th to Freedom and Censorship. The 7th  issue was dedicated to the much-needed bridging of divides between India and Pakistan. The 8th issue  critiqued Beauty - preconceived notions and stereotypes. The 9th issue, an exploration of cultural links between France and India. The 10th, a response to 9/11 & Gujarat, people & places in conflict. The 11th issue is an inquiry. What Mahatma Gandhi means to us today. Is it not time to evoke his teachings of compassion & non-violence? The 12th issue is a departure:  A celebration of Rain. Gallerie's 13th  issue is dedicated to Kashmir. Its conflict of 15 years. The 14th issue highlights women. Women who have empowered themselves and made a difference to their own lives and that of the community. The 15th  issue  explores multiculturism in Britain while the 16th issue views the earth from various interesting perspectives. Gallerie.s 17th issue titled, "Two Bengals" traces the shared culture of Bangladesh and West Bengal. The 18th issue is a celebration of books. The 19th issue is a study of contemporary culture in Iran. The 20th anniversary issue is "Beyond Boundaries." The 21st issue "Japan Now"  features the best of Japan's  creative community, its contemporary socio-political concerns. The 22th issue: "The Sacred & Profane", is a discourse on religion while the forthcoming 23rd issue is a socio-political and cultural perspective of Afghanistan. 

Gallerie is produced by a very small group of people comprising the editor-designer, a DTP operator, a print and production executive. It presently sustains itself through the editor's own personal resources, well-wishers, occasional grants and the support of processors and printers who work on a near-cost basis out of their belief in the magazine. 

A look at the 22 issues show how Gallerie has evolved into a meaningful forum. Each new issue pleases the sensibilities as much as it challenges and disturbs; celebrates life even as it holds up a mirror to our collective conscience.  

In the words of noted art critic, Mel Gooding, who inaugurated the 4th "Race" issue at the Nehru Centre in London on September 6, 1999, "Gallerie draws my attention to what I didn't know or what I thought I never needed to know... it is positive and passionate." 

At the same event, Gilane Tawadros, Director of the International Institute of Visual Arts, London, remarked how refreshing it was for her to discover Gallerie in a "post-everything" world where even idealism was out of fashion. 

--------


k_satchidanandan


A MAN WITH A DOOR

A man walks with a door
along the city street;
he looks for its house.

He had once dreamt
of his woman, children and friends
coming in through the door.
Now he sees a whole world
pass through this door
of his never-built house:
men, vehicles,trees,
beasts, birds,everything.

And the door, its dream 
rising above the earth,
longs to be the door of Heaven;
imagines clouds,rainbows,
demons, fairies and saints 
pass through it 
and shines like gold.

But it is the owner of Hell
who awaits the door.
Now it just yearns 
to be its tree,full of foliage
swaying in the breeze,
just to provide some shade
to its homeless haulier.

A man walks with a door
along the citystreet ;
a star walks with him.

(Translated from the Malayalam by the poet)



ANGELS

Angels do not live on moonlight.
They know nothing about relativity.
They make light of the law of gravity.
Since they have wings in place of hands
They cannot properly handle even a cup of tea,
count change or  set a blown fuse,
not to speak of sending an SMS.

Angels hate to take part in funeral rites.
All that stuff about their standing guard
to the sick  and singing lullabies for
those sleeping on the streets
is nothing but bluff.

Their relationship with God is in jeopardy.
In fact they were banished from Heaven
for their lethargy and indulgence.
Names like  Gabriel and Raphael 
they picked up after they were
abandoned on earth. 
They are suffering from diabetes and B. P .
as they  had long been on 
an excess of manna.
Human drugs have failed on them.
Veterenary doctors think
their wings are fake.
But they are real as they
get entangled in microwave towers : 
it is their wail that
we just heard on our mobiles.

Angels envy men :
thought is anathema to them.
They survive only as they are gay.

Once I saw  a wingless angel
riding the back of a local train.
Its eyes were  no more than sockets
and the cheeks  had no cheeks in them.
Seeing it try hard to sing aawaaraa hoom *
with its sooty lips
to the accompaniment 
of the train's whistle,
I wept.

(Translated from the original  Malayalam by the poet)

awaaraa hoom  : a Hindi film song popularised by the actor Rajkapoor, the words mean, " I am a vagabond".



CACTUS

Thorns are my language.
I announce my existence
with a bleeding touch.

Once these thorns were flowers.
I loathe lovers who betray.
Poets have abandoned the deserts
to go back to the gardens.
Only camels remain here, and merchants,
who trample my blooms  to dust.

One thorn for each rare drop of water.
I don't tempt butterflies,
no bird sings my praise.
I don't yield to droughts.

I create another beauty
beyond the moonlight,
this side of dreams,
a sharp,piercing,
parallel language.

(Translated from the Malayalam by the poet)



HOW TO GO TO THE TAO TEMPLE

Don't lock the door.
Go lightly like the leaf in the breeze
along the dawn's valley.
If you are too fair,
cover yourself with ash.
If too clever, go half-asleep.
That which is fast
will tire fast : 
be slow, slow as stillness.

Be formless like water.
Lie low,don't even try to go up.
Don't go round the deity : 
nothingness has no directions,
no front nor back.
Don't call it by name,
its name has no name.
No offerings: empty pots
are easier to carry than full ones.
No prayers too: desires 
have no place here.

Speak silently, if speak you must:
like the rock speaking to the trees
and leaves to flowers.
Silence is the sweetest of voices
and Nothingness has
the fairest of colours.

Let none see you coming 
and none, going.
Cross the threshold shrunken 
like one crossing a river in winter.
You have only a moment  here
like the melting snow.

No pride: you are not even formed.
No anger: not even dust
is at your command.
No sorrow: it doesn't alter anything.
Renounce greatness:
there is no other way to be great.
Don't ever use your hands:
They are contempalting
not love ,but vilolence.

Let the fish lie in its water
and the fruit, on its bough.
The soft one shall survive the hard, 
like the tongue that survives teeth. 
Only the one who does nothing 
can do everything.

Go, the unmade idol 
awaits you.

(From  The Northern Canto 1994)

(Translated from the Malayalam by the poet)



STAMMER

Stammer is no handicap.
It is a mode of speech.

Stammer is the silence that falls
between the word and its meaning,
just as lameness is the
silence that falls between 
the word and the deed.

Did stammer precede language
or succeed it?
Is it only a dialect or
a language itself?
These questions make 
the linguists stammer.

Each time we stammer
we are offering a sacrifice
to the God of meanings.

When a whole people stammer 
stammer becomes their mother-tongue:
just as it is with us now.

God too must have stammered 
when He created man.
That is why all the words of man 
carry different meanings.
That is why everything he utters 
from his prayers to his commands 
stammers, 
like poetry.

(Translated from the Malayalam by the poet)



COOL,HOT

In Delhi's cold 
I recall my mother,
the first warmth 
that had enveloped me.

I could not take mother to Kasi,
not even her lullaby.
That remorse has a compartment 
in every train that shuttles 
between Delhi and Benares.

Standing on the banks 
of Ganga with my lifemate
I thought: could have brought 
at least mother's ashes for Ganga.

There was no shortage of ashes,
nor of dead bodies;
but mother had lived 
and died in Malayalam.
‘Ram nam sach hei' would have
turned her an alien.

Yet the Lord knew her
with her coolness.
Didn't she  hide in that 
unoiled matted hair?*
Here, she flows in front of me.
Let me wash my feet in her.
It may not expiate my sins;
but is cool like affection, soiled.

Reaching home in Delhi
I turn on the water-tap:
Here comes Ganga, purified.
How did mother manage
to pass through this pipe?

"O, I took a magic potion: Death.
Now I can take any shape,
can go anywhere."

I scooped her up in my hands:
And got cooled,
In Delhi's heat.

(Translated from the Malayalam by the poet)

*Remember  Siva hiding Ganga in his tangled hair.









--------


zoran_anchevski


BETWEEN  TWO  WORLDS

Lost between two worlds
one dead,
the other incapable of being born
with neither brow 
nor nape

So little brain is left
per capita
so little sense 
in this domain of ragged crags
and years of drought

Headless
but at the head eunuchs and petty minds
Someone said: Acheron's ahead,
as deep as life
We sleep the night in the camp
of previous wretches
full of sheep-droppings and mercurial waste
We wait for the ferryman
to ferry us across for free
to the misty shore
that end of our hopes
to Salvation
the final fall

To the end
that our Salvation is
or is not
is
?
!
.



Меѓу два света

Скитнати меѓу два света
еден мртов –
другиот немоќен да се роди
ни чело
ни тил имаме

Толку малку мозок ни остана
per capita
толку малку разум
во предел од сури спили
и сушни години

Без чело
а на чело со евнуси и ситни души
Рече некој: „Ахеронт е пред нас" –
длабок ко живот
Ноќиме во логор
од некои претходни бедници
полн брбушки и живин отпад
и секој зачмаен во групниот грев
го чекаме Бродарот
без пари да не пренесе преку
до брегот маглив
до целта надежна
до Спасот
што пропаст е крајна
до Крајот
што светиот Спас ни е
не е
е
?
!
.



halfVERSES

I see

some  halfGods  halfCircle  halfEurope
and stay for halfDay
halfHour
in halfDarkness
halfDream
halfPeace

torn between
halfLegal  halfStates

then halfDead
halfMad
in halfVoice  offer
halfSolutions

to the halfDrunk
halfLiterate
halfAware
but angrier than ever

halfSavages
halfCultured

Ah,
half–
half–
everything crumbles in half
halfOffal

Translated by Sudeep Sen and the author



Полустишие

Гледам

некои полуБожества полуКружат низ полуЕвропа
и полуДневно
полуЧасовно престојуваат
во полуМрак
полуСон
полуМир

растргани меѓу

полуОстрови
полуМесечини
полуСонца
полуПразни полуЛегални полуДржави

та полуМртви
полудени
со полуГлас нудат
полуРешенија

на полуПијани
полуПисмени
полуСвесни
а полути од кога и да е
полуСелани
полуГраѓани

Ааах,
полу –
полу –
сè наполу ни оди –

полуција чиста



FATE

Like a sailor
at the end of history,
in the eye of a storm,
in the naval of the world
which pools the blood
and swirls it wide,
tied to the mast
of this Balkan ship
which neither sinks nor sails,
turned into an unsealed ear
I hear the song of the mermaids
which is an air-raid warning,
I hear the roar of the waves
which run headless
like heedless dogs
and break upon this un-
known shore,
bite. . .

Then I know:
the cross-currents of the world
haul us in that direction
from Scylla to Charybdis
to the embrace of impudent Europe,
which, like the lavish Circe,
first wants to make us swine
and throw us into her Balkan sty
to feed us with swill,
to do as she pleases
and then,
as if to parcel out dignity,
enjoy our heroic odes and epics.



Судбина

Како морнар
на крајот од историјата,
во окото на бурата,
во папокот на светот
што вири крв
и ја шири,
врзан за јарболот
на овој балкански брод
што ни тоне, ни плови,
сиот уво незапечатено сторен
го слушам појот на сирените
што предупреда е за воздушен напад,
го слушам татнежот на брановите
што безглаво јуришаат
ко кучиња дрчни
и плескаат по овој познат –
непознат брег,
гризат...

Тогаш знам:
струите подводни, светски,
незапирливо натаму нè носат:
од Скила и Харибда
кон прегратките на Европа безочна
што ко Кирка дрочна
свињи сака прво да нè стори
да нè фрли во калта од кочината балканска
и со помија да нè храни
да си тера како што & годи
за потем,
за малку барем да нè удостои,
да ужива во нашите херојски епови и оди.



SURVIVAL

Having exhausted every possibility
of any future at this time
rejecting it
like an empty shell
like a used rubber
we set off in search
of a surrogate self

But the past is a yoke
impossible to deal with
an absolute controversy
a civilized invention
to unify views
to channel thoughts
and wash brains—
a biological need of oxen

The past is a dead quote
a transcript       a carrion
we devour
like vultures
each tugging at its own piece
scared
lest we lose ourselves
lest our corpuscles
blacken
lest our sight desicate
and our brood perish

Every possibility is exhausted
the heroes are weary       decimated
the search unavailing
Silently       Covertly
we retreat into the shadow
of our skins
into our cocoon
for permanent hibernation



Опстанок

Откако секоја можност за иднина
во сегашноста ќе ја исцрпиме
и отфрлиме
како празна черупка
употребена гумичка
поаѓаме во потрага
по замена на себеси

Но минатото е јарем
со кој никако да се справиме
апсолутна контроверза
цивилизациски изум
за единство на погледи
канализирање мисли
и миење мозоци –
биолошка потреба на ѕевгарот

Минатото е мртов цитат
препис		стрвина
врз која се нафрламе
како мршојади 
тегнејќи секој свое парче
уплашени
да не се изгубиме себеси
да не ни поцрнат
белите крвни зрнца
виделцето да не ни пресуши
и окотот да не ни пцовиса

Секоја можност е исцрпена
хероите уморни	десеткувани
потрагата јалова
Молкум	Потајум
си се повклекуваме
во кожинката наша
во чаурата ни
за трајна хибернација



HISTORY

When the moon
is a peeled orange
dripping-heavy at night –
Minerva, the owl,
flies away blindly into darkness –
careful, pedantic –
joyfully 
listening to every murmur
of the previous day,
following every spasm in dreams
overhearing every sigh of love
quietly without disturbing anything –
and, with satellite-precision
attacks her victims.

During the day
when the sun is a dazzling cauldron
tintinabulating across the sky,
when we are in haste, unable to greet each other;
when we have no time to see one another,
or, to see who is there, or missing;
she is resting at ease in its burrow,
masticating, consuming her prey.

Translated by Sudeep Sen and the author



Историја

Кога месечината
е излупен портокал
што дрочи во ноќта –
Минерва, бувот,
потамина излетува во мракот
и ревносно,
со радосно уво,
го слуша секој мрмор
од претходниот ден,
го следи секој грч во сонот,
ја заушува
најтивката љубовна воздишка
и без ништо да нарушува,
со сателитска прецизност
ја наоѓа својата жртва.

Потем дење,
кога сонцето е калаисано котле
што се тркала и ѕингара по небото,
кога безглаво итаме
кон нашиот одложен крај
и немаме време да се видиме,
да видиме
кој од нас го нема, ни фали,

таа спокојно, во своето дувло,
уловот си го прежива и вари.



I AM A BOTTLE

submerged – two-thirds in the sea.
I contain no messages for the world –
only digits designating my birth-date.
I do not feel the greedy hands 
gripping my chilled body,
nor parched lips thirsting –
‘O' thirsting, for my mouth –
I hear no words of praise
for the bosom-fluid I bore.

I float, emptied of myself,
of the soothing liquid-dark
that matured, aging in the cellar.
Ebbs, tides of life have swept 
me to unknown shores,
exhausted me into oblivion.

Now, I yearn for a storm,
its gait gathering in the garden –
the sea grabbing my throat,
burying me in deep waters
to find, finally, my peace.

Translated by Sudeep Sen with the author



Како шише

Како шише потонато две третини в море
не содржам никаква порака за светот –
само бројки за моето потекло втиснати на дното.
Не ги чувствувам веќе жешките усни
што од мене отпивале жедно,
ни рацете што за мене се грабале,
не ги слушам веќе пофалните зборој
за она што долго во себе сум го зреел.

Се лулам сосема испразнет од себе,
од мекиот подрумски мрак
што трпеливо, со години сум го впивал.
Приливот и одливот на животот
ме носат де поблизу, де подалеку од брегот,
ме заморуваат до заборав.

Сега сè пожелно го чекам оној бран
што во морската мешина се збира,
да ме зграби за врат,
да ме поклопи
и конечно да се смирам.



SPEECH
	
I s-s-stammer b-b-before
the g-g-gates of Babylon
want say
can't talk

My voice cracks
multiplies
under my tongue
the words spawn

And I wonder
did I utter this word
or it me
we'll deceive each other ever
as we have forever
since the word go
since our first babel-babble

What an ef-ef-fort to recognise ourselves
in this wilderness of mirrors
in the womb of this va-
cant world, clam-shell
the p-p-pre-pre-pre-pre-
existence of the echo.



Говор

Пелтечам п-п-пред п-п-п-
портите на Вавилон
сакам кажам –
не знам речам

Гласот се двои
се множи
под јазик се мрести
зборот

Па се прашам:
го кажав ли јас тој збор
или тој мене
или се лажеме –
ќе се лажеме до бескрај
како што сме се лажеле
уште од памтивек
од првичниот ни џагор-говор

– напор да се препознаеме
во оваа дивина од огледала
во утробата на овој пра-
Зен свет – школка
пра-пра-пра-пра-
постојбина на ехото.



--------


triztan_vindtorn


1 BLUE PICTURES ON A GREEN EASEL

your ocean compass is bathing in sunshine
and the prow is digging into
white sand before stopping ..
no footprints left by naked feet here
nor any bird carcasses dissolved in salt
only wet flapping sails clapping you on your back
and wind across your sun-burned shoulders ..

the Tristan albatross is still hovering over the mast-top
polishing its scientific gaze against the surface of the sea
this ocean on eternity's ball bearings
and rocks worn round and shaped by wavy fingers ..
you stand at the shores of your own body
feeling the tide rise in your eyes
while you observe the lonely coconut
which the ocean has brought here from another shore ..

maybe cut loose with a sharp machete
or chewed into freedom by the dentures of the wind ..
there is no tsunami on its way into this island kingdom
do these micro-continents know each other's names?
you wonder while time becomes a large strange bird
across the same ocean which answers its own echo
and rolls on with its sleep-walker's heart intact ..
your skin desert drinks this all-embracing blue
waiting for the night to light its diamonds 



2 THOUGHTS IN A MOON CATAMARAN

of all the hidden treasures on earth
muteness and silence are
among the most exclusive ..
a bird's beak without notes
an adam's apple without worms
an auricle at the bottom of the ocean ..

this is the very germ and seed
of a race different from the flowers
buried in the black soil ..
the subversion of the problem causes
a derailing from the historical terrain
with an articulation that shatters the border of light ..

what witchcraft makes us see
unfamiliar landscapes through the words
the way you read a face drowned in music
or interpret the wrinkles in an aging hand?
where has this life gone
in all the other teeming colored pictures
which the sun releases from its fishing net
in order to nail us to the totem pole of now?

everything which shoots our shadow on the open street
or sets fire to the nocturnal scenery of dreams
still there are lungs out there
willing to release the rush of life
and mingle with your own 



3 LARGER THAN EVERYTHING

think of the distance between two human hands
and the night sky dressed in white flowers
where only the bird beak of the moon can pick the seeds ..
think of the light years of the interplanetary calendar
with distances which cause the thought container to topple ..
but still the earth harp accepts the fingertips of rain
when they hit the strings in the beautiful prelude of silence ..

and my hand traces all your beautiful coastlines
in order to drown in your gaze or once again retrieve the sun's pulse
which drives us on beyond every circumference ..
we glide through the blood's net of notes in the very labyrinth of life
where our breath oscillates between the soft and the strong ..
we can force the light out of the tunnel opening blinding us
then turn the rudder in order to run aground on a bleached shoreline ..

listen to the wind and our shouts when the sea breaks against the cliffs
and the second's own components explode in foam
an airy water-net revealing the carnival underneath the make-up ..
there is a lushness of lips growing on every rainforest branch
and underneath the bark the wind musicians sit practicing their work
every string-busted and naked nerve lost in overtones
a symbiosis of coral breath at each other's expense ..

in the city jungle on the other hand love may be a snakebite
not only hitting the eye but with poison spreading in the landscape of the flesh
for the human being does not always recognize his own walls
nor does he stop in these endless dreamy movements
even outside the reach of his gaze and in moral riverbeds ..
still everything consists of pictures cut out from the same reality

radioactively the sap rises in bark and skin mixed with visions
a conglomerate of desire flickered into blood showers and watered flowers
everything which sinks and gathers in a puddle around our feet ..
does this hand catch up with you before you disappear over the ridge
do the leaves cover their ears before they hit the grassy knoll in thunder
does an unknown woman live in every man's heart?

see life climb higher and higher towards the gull's cry in the mainsail
between your oxygen-drunk lungs and the jackal in your own throat
the way the ecstasy in the pit of a sweet cherry flowers in the next generation ..
with the seed as map reader we will conquer new and unknown fruits
still part of a solar system forever fleeing from itself
the way every thought is a kingfisher across its own sky 



4 BACK ACROSS THE OPPOSITE POLE

we refuse to pick all those snow flowers
stand close together inside the tree in order not to wilt
soon the tree breath will also throw itself into the wind's arms
and the smoke which filters out through the foliage
confirms that the heat will bring the world forward ..
when the dream's enigma runs through your fingers
you yourself become a door in the forest and close the words behind you 



5 LINGUISTIC SEARCH PARTY

death is without logic and only a circle
placed outside another to fix the limit
of the glowing mass of our volcanic lives ..

every thought has its own egg as a hiding place
for shooting stars and breakneck exercises
the core of our pointless leaps into survival ..

the dark cathedral may easily be transformed into amniotic fluid
set free by the moon's quivering fingertips
like flotsam towards all our chained enigmas ..

in the linguistic search for new paintings
the goal is what can save us from point zero
while the trough between the waves drowns out all our cries ..

life's energy discharge and the planet's rotation
are not only remedies against sleep
but against the sound of glass ringing in our throat ..

in order to have the rainbow drip from our armpits
and green sprouts grow out of the lovers' eyes
this brief story is lifted onto a broader plane ?

see the human being drag a wing across the earthen floor
and the army of black shoes which hone the corner of the world
back on the wet asphalt lies only a run-over moon 



6 WE COUNT THE YEAR RINGS OF THE BODY

in order to forget the language of love
you throw up your fingers into the glass bowl
before also draining your weightless head ..
soon you are blazed like a tree in the forest
and must from now on study and stare at the fish
as they knot their own dark nets
out there where the stitches may tear in the sun ..

for there are still dreams that happen in the dark
and disappear instead of cancelling the law of gravity
or inventing a landscape you have never seen
and where every mountain top exhibits an insidious color
which hides the blood hounds hidden in the text ..
even in the letters' built-in flowers the pain lives
and in the reflexes the ocean returns to the glowing planet ..

only in the eyeballs' fresh cheeks may the distance bathe
and our gazes stagger towards the upper treeline of experience
hunting for the sapphire light which blows out the night ..
is the earth really the encapsulated body of a woman
with breasts of flying stones and diamonds?
we hear our common heart fall from our breathing bridge in the clouds
and stare at the moon .. a brass button in the night's black coat 



7 FROM THE TOP OF THE MOMENT

from the top of the moment we look out across nothing
it is better to lead an exciting landscape into the poem
and freshen it up by adding color ..
a deep-red sun still hangs for a little while at the end of the runway
where fields of flowers and grain lean down towards the sea
at this frozen moment the sky is completely without clothes
the enormous flood waters become an eye rolling across the earth
that on its wanderings carries with it visible spices ..

this is the salt I lick and gather with the tip of my tongue
from the silky surface of your taut breasts ..
now my ocean also rises washing
the endless series of red waves through my lungs
while silence swims across your sunburned hands
the same silence that slumbers in the bread until you cut it ..
soon the moon fingers will look for planetary fallen fruit
not only on the mossy forest floor but among the army of grain in the field
stiff and lined up like Giacometti's sculptures 

you lift a flat rock .. a miniature space ship
feel the wind sitting there dangling its legs in ancient trees
the same wind that with curiosity peeks up your skirt ..
here I will plant a wild flower in each of your pores
while we cling to each other like in a movie by Fellini ..
here as stowaways on board the speck of dust called Earth
where you wonder what it is that drives this carefree machinery
which once again slowly turns on the light from above in the large dark ballroom
not only making your eyes sparkle but also feel the dizziness
which accompanies our goals all the way to the top of the silver-plated sky ladder
where I can hear the stars and your hand singing 



8 BEHIND THE MASK

when the storm has subsided
behind your temples
a mirror-ship heads out of the inner haze
its sails filled with words
and sentence parts from our own time
as thick as anchor chains ..

some expressions may keep
the rust in check
through several centuries
before they let go of the water
and sink ..
only the outlines of your thoughts
still remain on the mirror of writing
and are carried away by the heaving waves 



9 GRIMACES OF LANGUAGE

that one's vision is infinite is an incredibly beautiful illusion
but utopias exist in order to make the pictures stretch
further that the coloring allows and open new revolving doors ..
last night we looked at the moon with fingers sewn together
not an evening of great gestures but lit up by reflection ..


I ran through your locked room like a horse
and ordered the entire ensemble into the circus ring
in such delusions things emerge from the pupils
to avoid having the inner stairway of the sun disappear in the heat ..
soon we run along the well-stocked shelves in the library
our fingers clutching the pen before the tableau is extinguished ..


now we hear the voices lose themselves in the labyrinth of sound
while the world brings us ever closer together ..
no great strides across prime meridians and the equator
but under silent bells chiming in the inner room
the way that love can remember every little wrinkle
in the other person's face if one is able to retain it ..


or everything transforms itself into a kind of strange hypnosis
it does not suddenly appear in order to show its sun virility
but to yank all spoken letters up by the root
before the snake-crawling fear of parting takes over ..
everything may sneak into the text while it is about to
lose its overview on the easel of oblivion ..


the sand-filled winds which only wreak havoc in the canvas stretcher
may like thought be fixed directly to the cave wall
the timeless reflection arose however long before the words
which also whirl onwards over our erogenous zones
without the vagina thereby creating video images on her own cave wall ..


the course of history has been brought in to secure the fear of pictures
the abstract curve of the paintbrush which worships only colors
the way the cave-dwellers of the past fertilized a nocturnal darkness
enormous flame-cast silhouettes bent over a steaming carcass
while bones and wolf skins breathed in blood steam and sulphur
on board a blue earth apple .. cocooned by ozone ..


we find each other's arms again and wake up from the vision
still the birds of language fly up from quivering guitar strings
and stroke our nerves with their colored wingspan
we provide shadow for the eyes in order to better observe the flock
as it slowly disappears in the flames ..

on the opposite side of the fabricated frame of text
we see a boat fish in its own mirror image and pull with its net
the clouds up from the ocean thus to transform a panorama ..
with a blue mouth and an extended tongue of sand you speak to the ocean's dead calm
drawing the head's bow and shooting the arrow of thought straight into the poem's heart 



--------


pia_tafdrup


from THE WHALES IN PARIS 2002
translated by David McDuff

THE WHALES IN PARIS

It's hardly Paris the whales sing about in the great oceans,
but the city is beautiful this morning, when I wake
after dreaming about ton-heavy, cavorting whales.
On all sides they swam, the gigantic creatures,
and my only salvation in the rough sea 
was to grab hold of their tails, which were so slippery
that my hands slid the moment the whales altered course 
or flapped their tails hard, so I was hurled far away,
but each time I swam back, grabbed hold again 
and in this way kept myself alive all night long…
On the wall opposite I see now that it's a brilliant morning,
the greetings of the birds suggest the same,
the whales are gone, a woman goes from window to window,
raising the Venetian blinds and opening the windows ajar, 
– this I enter in my dream journal.
The sun falls into the woman's kitchen,
where she walks around putting heaps of clothes together.
Each day our lives are invented;
a so far new combination of the known and the unknown,
will perhaps arise today –
it depends on what falls into our minds,
falls into us, embraces us with memory-deep gaze,
when we seek an entrance to something
                                               that is freedom for the soul –
and will tolerate no limit other than the open sky. 



HVALERNE I PARIS

Det er næppe Paris, hvalerne synger om i de store oceaner,
men byen er smuk denne morgen, hvor jeg vågner 
efter at have drømt om tonstunge, legende hvaler. 
Til alle sider svømmede de gigantiske dyr,
min eneste redning i det oprørte hav 
var at gribe fat i deres haler, der var så glatte, 
at mine hænder gled, det øjeblik hvalerne bugtede sig af sted 
eller slog hårdt med halen, så jeg blev slynget langt væk, 
men hver gang svømmede jeg tilbage, greb fat igen 
og holdt mig på denne måde i live natten igennem ...
På muren overfor ser jeg nu, at det er en lysende morgen,
af fuglenes hilsner fremgår det samme,
hvalerne er borte, en kvinde går fra vindue til vindue,
hejser persiennerne op og åbner vinduerne på klem,
- dette fører jeg ind i min drømmeprotokol.
Solen falder ind i kvindens køkken,
hvor hun går omkring og lægger bunker af tøj sammen.
Hver dag opfindes vores liv;
en hidtil ny kombination af det kendte og ukendte, 
opstår måske i dag — 
det afhænger af, hvad der falder os ind, 
falder ind i os, omfavner os med erindringsdybt blik,
når vi søger en indgang til noget, 
                                          der er frihed for sjælen —
og ikke tåler anden begrænsning end den vide himmel.



WITHOUT MANDOLIN 

"Abstract means not recognizing something" –
says the woman at the museum to the children on the floor.
The group follows her finger
from "Man With Guitar" to "Man With Mandolin".
On the contrary he is very concrete
                                           and not painted by Picasso,
the man who has keeled over on the pavement
and grown together with a plane-tree in bud,
which young folk hurry past along the river
in cars paid for by bad conscience of rich fathers,
not heading anywhere in particular, perhaps
to a concert this evening
	     ─ without mandolin.
They rush past the man, who outcast by himself,
by others,
or casting out the city,
sleeps motionless in a dust-brown coat
with his head on the kerb,
while hungry pigeons peck at his bread… Death
also passes one windless afternoon,
where sunlight hurries between the branches of the tree.
Fire flows in his breast,
                           draws a confusion of flight-tracks.
What is that runs to meet the river,
as the water changes from dark to gold,
                                                       a glittering wound?
The cold sucks blackly from the earth,
the city closes round the man,
a crooked, coagulated figure no one recognizes,
something sealed and alien,
                                    which everyone, in spite of its open face,
continues to pass by in an arc –
and thus makes abstract.



UDEN MANDOLIN

Abstrakt betyder ikke at genkende noget —
siger kvinden på museet til børnene på gulvet. 
Flokken følger hendes finger 
fra "Mand med guitar" til "Mand med mandolin".
Derimod er han meget konkret 
                                    og ikke malet af Picasso, 
ham der er segnet om på fortovet
og vokset sammen med et platantræ i knop, 
som unge jager forbi langs floden
i biler betalt af rige fædres dårlige samvittighed,
ikke på vej noget bestemt sted hen, måske 
til koncert i aften
                   - uden mandolin.
De suser forbi manden, der udstødt af sig selv, 
af andre, 
eller udstødende byen, 
sover ubevægelig i støvbrun frakke  
med hovedet mod kantstenen, 
mens sultne duer hakker i hans brød ... Døden
passerer også en vindstille eftermiddag, 
hvor sollys iler mellem træets grene.
Ild flyder i brystet, 
                  trækker et virvar af flugtspor.
Hvad løber floden i møde,
når vandet skifter fra mørkt til gyldent, 
                                                 et glitrende sår?
Kulden suger sort fra jorden, 
byen lukker sig om manden, 
en kroget, koaguleret skikkelse ingen genkender,                                             
noget forseglet fremmed, 
                        som alle, på trods af hans åbne ansigt,
i fortsat strøm går i en bue udenom —
og således gør abstrakt.



WHAT HOUR, WHAT MINUTE?

An offence in life is sometimes punished
by death
– poison – gas – electric chair – firing squad – or hanging –
but what is death,
when it doesn't come as punishment?
It can hardly be a reward?
Condemned to die
are we
– even without punishment.
Or is death
in spite of everything a gift,
as otherwise we would have lived too long?
That would be a punishment!
For ourselves, and for others.
It is hard to see death
as a gift,
when I want to throw away the piece of paper
with the name and address of a friend,
who is death,                                                                          
because I must remind myself 
not to send any more letters, not call any more,
but probably not give up having conversations in dreams…         
Shall I hide the frayed scrap of paper
or remember its contents?
It is quiet
in the shadow…
I evacuate the address he wrote for me
– but why?
Because the sky with rising glow
shines red as Herod now –                          
or because a woodpecker
wanders out on a branch with its feet up
and head down,
               but its gaze
                          along the morning sky of the abyss.



HVILKEN TIME, HVILKET MINUT?

En forseelse i livet straffes undertiden
med døden 
- gift - gas - strøm - skud - eller hængning -
men hvad er døden,
når den ikke kommer som straf?
Vel næppe en belønning?
Dømt til at dø
er vi
- selv uden straf.
Eller er døden
trods alt en gave,
da vi ellers havde levet for længe?
Dét ville være en straf!
for os selv og andre.
Svært er det at se døden
som en gave, 
når jeg vil smide papirlappen væk 
med navn og adresse på en ven, 
der er død,
fordi jeg skal huske mig selv på
ikke at sende flere breve, ikke ringe op mere,
men vel ikke afstå fra at samtale i drømme ...
Skal jeg gemme den flossede lap 
eller huske dens indhold?
Der er stille
i skyggen ...
Jeg evakuerer adressen, han skrev til mig
- men hvorfor?
Fordi himlen med stigende glød 
lyser herodesrødt —
eller fordi en spætte nu
vandrer ud ad en gren med fødderne op 
og hovedet ned, 
                 men blikket 
                         langs afgrundens morgenhimmel.



SLEEP HIEROGLYPH

One moment,
when others are out of sight, 
in the dream you will embrace me,
so that my plutonic soul
will not forget that I'm alive.
You throw your arms round me,
in that same instant push
up into me –
my white heart
beats hard
in the rose darkness.
I adapt myself to a foreign climate,
am surprised by your smell, which I did not recognize,
but love unconditionally,
like something I had missed without being aware of it,
as the earth goes under,
                            and you are the sky,
where a rising sun 
                        shines
behind the horizon of your closed eyes…
My heart beats volcanically hard,
the blood's lava glows through my sleep,
writes itself somatically black along the mountain's sides.



SØVNHIEROGLYF 

Et øjeblik, 
hvor andre er ude af syne,
vil du i drømmen omfavne mig,
for at min plutoniske sjæl 
ikke skal glemme, at jeg er levende.
Du slår armene om mig,
trænger i samme nu
op i mig —
mit hvide hjerte
slår hårdt
i rosenmørket.
Jeg tilpasser mig et fremmed klima,
overraskes af din lugt, som jeg ikke kendte, 
men elsker ubetinget,
som noget jeg havde savnet uden at vide af det,
da jorden går under,
                      og du er himlen,
hvor en opstigende sol 
                               skinner
bag dine lukkede øjnes horisont ...
Mit hjerte slår vulkanisk hårdt,
blodets lava gløder gennem søvnen,
skriver sig somatisk sort ned ad bjergets sider.



FAREWELL, WE SAY

Farewell, we say to the dying,
but don't forget them,
                         until we ourselves die,
and are perhaps remembered
so as that way - while grey ducks
in a pointed vibrating wedge
migrate across the sky -
                              to receive continued existence.
Just as the words, when they are spoken,
receive meaning and brilliance.
Or the grain of dust that hangs in the beam of light,
makes visible the fact
that the globe with its six billions
goes on rotating ―
             and nothing seems impossible.
Exactly as when my father
walked with me holding one hand
while my mother held the other...
So with bare feet I passed
the snake in the grass and the worst enemies.
So I was brought floating into the world,
into the open
             to be deposited here.



FARVEL, SIGER VI

Farvel, siger vi til de døende,
men glemmer dem ikke, 
                              før vi selv dør,
og muligvis huskes
for således - mens gråænder
i en spidst vibrerende kile 
trækker hen over himlen -
                            at få fortsat eksistens.
Ligesom ordene, når de udtales,
får betydning og glans.
Eller støvkornet, der hænger i lysstriben, 
synliggør, 
at kloden med dens seks milliarder 
roterer videre —
           og intet synes umuligt.
Akkurat som dengang min far 
gik med mig i den ene hånd,
og min mor holdt mig i den anden ...
Sådan passerede jeg på bare fødder
slangen i græsset og de værste fjender.
Sådan blev jeg ført svævende ind i verden, 
ind i det åbne 
             for at bundfældes her.



IN SOMEONE ELSE'S DREAM

Between the tree's weavings of stems,
the sun stands in fever-bright dance,
birds sing with requited love.
I pick up waves of sound –
the branches sway rhythmically,
reflexes of morning light are thrown
in across the floor in springy fields of light,
where the cat with a soft thud
settles down to lick a paw. 
I'm outside everything, an ear
	                      in someone else's dream.
I am hammer and anvil,
raise houses 
         parallel displaced 	
to the brain's architecture,
knock the words together
                           and hear a brittle sound of wings,
as when I learned how to cut the pages of books,
and be able to make the knife
                                       hiss against the paper
like wing-beats through the room...
See birds land on the sills
of kaleidoscopic dwellings,
so tightly they can hold onto thoughts –
and at the same time so permeable
that stars and other dreams
will force their way in... Wildly transparent.



I EN FREMMED DRØM

Mellem træets udfletninger af stammer,
står solen i feberblank dans,
fugle synger af gengældt kærlighed.
Jeg opfanger bølger af lyd —
grenene vajer rytmisk,
reflekser af morgenlys kastes 
ind over gulvet i fjedrende lysfelter, 
hvor katten med et blødt bump 
slår sig ned for at slikke en pote.
Jeg er uden for alt, et øre 
                                  i en fremmed drøm.
Jeg er hammer og ambolt, 
rejser huse 
         parallelforskudt 
til hjernens arkitektur,
tømrer ordene sammen
                       og hører en sprød lyd af vinger,
som da jeg lærte at sprætte bøger op,
og kunne få kniven mod papiret 
                                       til at suse 
som vingeslag gennem stuen ...
Ser fugle lande på sålbænken 
til kalejdoskopiske boliger, 
så tætte, at de kan holde på tankerne —
og på samme tid så permeable, 
at stjerner og andre drømme 
vil trænge ind ... Vildt gennemskinnelige.



GRAVITATION OF SHADOWS

The children play by the lake in throbbing heat.
They touch one another's hands,
the sun from the highest sky
	                 makes wounds clot.
The children tumble about in the grass,
spun into dreams –
they stick together like wounds that are healing
and don't even know 
	   they are angels...
They kiss one another, they cuddle,
they go near the water.
The plants on the bottom glow in the sun
for the ones who tread right up to them.
In from the path the plants can hardly be sensed in the water
and not by the ones who are moving further away              
in among the trees' forgetfulness.
The children play by the lake –
they gather what they find,
they scream with delight and take it with them. 
The green swaying on the bottom
emerges from the low water,
sucks them down towards a darkness
		  they have no name for.
Birds fly above them,
the shadows from the birds
                                    give the children wings...
But the season changes
	  and becomes another,
the place changes
               and becomes another,
	               the era another. 		



SKYGGERS TYNGDEKRAFT

Børnene leger ved søen i bankende varme.
De berører hinandens hænder,
solen fra den højeste himmel 
                                  får sår til at størkne.
Børnene tumler om i græsset,
spundet ind i drømme —
de klæber sammen som sår, der heler
og ved endnu ikke,
                      at de er engle ...
De kysser hinanden, de kæler,
de nærmer sig vandet.
Planterne på bunden står og lyser i solen
for dem, der træder helt nær.
Inde fra stien anes planterne i vandet knap
og ikke af dem, der færdes længere borte
inde mellem træernes glemsel.
Børnene leger ved søen —
de samler, hvad de finder,
de skriger af fryd og bærer det med sig.
Det grønt svajende på bunden
dukker op af det lave vand, 
suger dem ned mod et mørke, 
                                   de ikke har navn for.
Fugle flyver over dem,
skyggerne fra fuglene
                      giver børnene vinger ...
Mens årstiden skifter 
                       og bliver en anden,  
stedet skifter
         og bliver et andet,  
                            tidsalderen en anden.



JOURNEY WITHOUT END

Close my eyes, hear the silence waken –
a river boils beneath the sky, goes roaring off,
images wrench themselves free from an inner continent,
fizz past in confusion.
What I see, I can't hold on to:
The thought, the dreamed, the much desired 
                                                           – the whole of it
I let go of,
allow the images to be what they are.
They sail away, glide out of my field of vision,
the water washes past my closed eyes.
I roll the images out, empty them all into the river,
until there is nothing left
                                  except the heart, which can be heard,
except the lungs, which breathe 
                                       – in, out…
It's not I who must get moving,
but the river, as I sit by its bank.
A light-shower of pearls the river becomes,
a water-light that trembles – the heart
scarcely needs to beat –
a mirror-undulating light, a freely cascading water,
which no grille shall block. 
There's a tingling in my skin, a faint pulsing, 
and inside the light, the purple blue
in a living flame,
and inside the purple blue
                                  an eye
which sees
that I give in and disappear,
give in and appear,
sees that the river becomes light, the light becomes haze,
that the mist wraps around me,
envelops me
                in a remembered embrace,
that I am slowly filled with emptiness, that the river
has glided out of my field of vision, that nothing reaches me,
that my body is heavy, heavily floating,
that the light vibrates white, 
	             before it stands still –
that there's a humming and stinging under the roots of my hair,
as I come to myself,
                     light as the mist
that early in the morning rise from the earth,
                                                               – open my eyes
and look at the world: Mysteriously near, and crystal sharp.



REJSE UDEN ENDE

Lukker øjnene, hører stilheden vågne —
en flod koger under himlen, bruser af sted,
billeder vrister sig fri af et indre kontinent,
syder i et virvar forbi.
Hvad jeg ser, holder jeg ikke fast: 
Det tænkte, det drømte, det endnu ikke fødte, 
det fjerne, det nære, det højt ønskede
                                             - det hele 
giver jeg slip på, 
lader billederne være det, de er.
De sejler af sted, glider ud af synsfeltet,
vandet skyller forbi mine lukkede øjne. 
Jeg vælter billederne ud, tømmer alt ned i floden,
indtil der intet er tilbage, 
                           andet end hjertet, der høres,
andet end lungerne, der ånder
                                       - ind, ud ... 
Det er ikke mig, der skal bevæge mig af sted,
men floden, når jeg sidder ved dens bred.
Et lysstyrt af perler bliver floden, 
et vandlys der skælver - hjertet 
behøver knapt at slå -
et spejlbølgende lys, et frit fossende vand,
som intet gitter skal spærre.
Det prikker i huden, pulserer svagt, 
og inde i lyset, det violet blå 
i en levende flamme,
og inde i det violet blå, 
                               et øje 
der ser, 
at jeg giver efter og forsvinder,
giver efter og kommer til stede,
ser at floden bliver lys, at lyset bliver dis, 
at disen svøber sig om mig,
indsvøber mig 
                 i et erindret favntag,
at jeg langsomt fyldes af tomheden, at floden 
er gledet ud af mit synsfelt, at intet når mig, 
at kroppen er tungt, tungt svævende, 
at lyset vibrerer hvidt, 
                          før det står stille —
at det summer og stikker under hårrødderne,
når jeg ankommer til mig selv, 
                                         let som tågen, 
der tidligt om morgenen løfter sig fra jorden,
                                                           - slår øjnene op
og betragter verden: Hemmeligt nær og krystalskarp.








--------


grace_nichols


Advice on crossing a street in Delhi

First take a few moments to observe
the traffic's wayward symmetry.
While contemplating wheels of mortality, 
note how whole families on motorbikes
dart daring within the shifting shoal 
of  the cacophonous river.

Surely if they can, you too can
weave a quick trajectory 
So go –
at the first signs of a small break
with a great faith and a great surrender.

If stranded in the middle of the road
become a sacred cow with gilded horns
adopting the inner stillness of  the lotus posture.
Let  honking cars, rickshaws, lorries,
swarm or fly around you.

You are in the hands of  the great mother.
The thing about India  maybe 
is  to get the rhythm right –
this rhythm that will change the way
you cross a street forever.


                                         
Saartjie Baartman Rests Her Case

Ladies and gentlemen
Friends, scientists, hypocrites,
My fellow Khoisans, kindred-spirits –

Who said I would never see
an African sunrise again?

Was it the jackal?
Was it the hyena?
Was it the adder?

Now that what's left of me is back
in the Gamtoos  valley
Now that my spirit has been purified
with the breaking of the arrow 
and the  burning of the Buchu
on wings of veldts I bear me

So weep a little, but not too much for Saartjie.
To recount her wrongs –
how she suffered under that umbrella
of distant greyness –
how she was obliged to strut her stuff
for the voyeurs of Europe,
how she was prodded at
would make even the mountain lions shake their manes.

Let us just say that I was young and foolish
and big on dreaming, the day I stepped
on board that ship with that man, England bound.
I was going to be a star, all four foot six of me –
With the reservoirs of my hips and my
copper-coloured skin; With my Chinese cast
of  eyes and all the particulars of our tribe –
I would make a fortune among a people
who had never seen the likes of me
and return to Table Mountain rich –
That was the promise. Yet even as that ship 
unbolted its waves about me, I was full of misgivings.


 Ladies and gentle men
Honourable ministers
Campaigners, ambassadors

I wanted to see the world and home was no paradise.
But let me not insult your imaginations,
let me just say that the get-ups 
they dressed me in for my performances,
left little to the imagination. I was always cold,
with only my ramkie*  to hold onto and my father's words:
That I should always be polite to my hosts.
You know the sorry story – between London
and Paris I was dead within five winters.

You could say that my life began to stir again
the day that Mandela requested back
my remains from the Musee De l'Homme de Paree;
‘It is time,' he said, ‘that she came home.'
Ladies and gentlemen, my heart tingled
at those words like as a cornerstone.
If anyone could ignite my path to freedom,
it was Mandela. Hadn't he out-stared 
for twenty-seven years Apartheid's spectre?
                      Mandela!
I tell you, if that man were a mandala
I would wear him close to my heart. 

Yet the battle, for this Khoisan  was not yet over.
The museologists would not part with me so easily
from the land of  liberte, equalite and fraternity.
Suddenly I was their African Mummy, 
their little mother goddess.
No one would care for my cast 
or my bits as much as their did.

But God forbid that I should weep for all eternity.
So here I am – their Hottentot Venus
airborne by metal-bird
to this leopard-skin welcome.
Saartjie Baartman, returned to the drum of her homeland.

Who said I would never see
An African sunrise again?

Was it the jackal?
Was it the hyena?
Was it the adder?

Over one and a half centuries in the jars of Europe,
ladies and gentlemen,
over one and a half centuries of pickles and caricatures.

Still, if you would permit a mere ghost
a last laugh before she lays down her bones –
What would the cartoonists of my days –
those who relished putting Cupid
on my exaggerated hips –
What would they make of today's 
Western woman, the ones who turn to surgery
to bootilicious their  booties?
. 
Brothers and sisters
Eulogisers, ululators
Well-wishers all 

I conclude my speech with this plea –
Now when you think of  Saartjie,
Simply remember that my click-songs
connected me to a continent,
my smile to many kingdoms.
Simply remember that  even
in the iciest winds I tried to feel at home.

Saartjie Baartman, an indigenous South African woman, was lured from her homeland to Europe in 1810 by a ship's doctor to become a ‘freak-show-attraction' first in London then in Paris where she died a destitute prostitute  just five years later, aged 26. Her main attraction was her prominent buttocks. After her death, a cast was made of her body, and her pickled genitals were put on display at  the Musee De'l Homme de Paree. Nelson Mandela took up her cause when he became President in 1994, but it wasn't until 2002 that her remains were finally returned to South Africa for a traditional Khoisan burial.

*Ramkie – an African guitar.


  
Laughing Woman's Sermons

1.    On The Emperor's New Clothes

Blessed be the child who spoke the truth
About the emperor's resplendent new suit.

‘But I can see his bum, Mummy' 
was all it took to unhook

this zero garment designed by a crook –
this non-existent wool from the crowd's eye.

And thus a child shall lead them from vanity's 
labels to laughter's  brimming brook.

2.    On Deeds and Words

Blessed be the joy-bringers
whether by deed or by word –
blessed be the little dog that laughed
when the dish ran away with the spoon
blessed be the cow that jumped over the moon –
As water is to a thirsty plant
so is laughter to the landscape
of  a wintry heart.

3.   On Tears and Laughter

Blessed be the sound of a laugh
Wherever it may start –

Blessed be smiles and giggles
Blessed be chortles and chuckles
Blessed be heaves and howls

For not every long-face
shall enter into the gates of  heaven
Not every cry or sigh shall get by

For it is laughter who takes
the hot caterpillars of tears
and sets  them dancing into butterflies.



--------


indran_amirthanayagam


LEAD 

I couldn't believe my luck,
the biggest story of my life
yet this saddest catastrophe:
backgrounds of palm trees,
whistling death, bodies
stacked up on the beach;

clambering through
the bric-a- brac
of a once elegant hotel,
umbrellas, mortar
and ceiling fans blown
into the swimming pool,

the owner pointed
to the remains 
of a room 
where a wheel-
chaired man
embraced his wife.

We do not know
what they said;
we lost nine here
but will rebuild. This 
hotel has withstood
civil war, entertained

visitors in tails and 
evening gowns
before World War II&#8212;
ah Ceylon  escaped
that calamity, except 
for the whistling 

of  Japanese bombers
and rationing, the lack
of soap and clothes,
breakdown of transport.
Now, we have 
Boxing Day,

Thumped 
on Boxing Day,
Washed Away
On Boxing Day, 
Buried
on Boxing Day. 

How will you lead, 
man, about 
the will to rebuild? 
historic shock?
disabled man
clasping his wife?


Indran Amirthanayagam c) 2007, 
from The Splintered Face Tsunami Poems, Hanging Loose Press	



GLOBAL VILLAGE

We
stood
between
lagoon
and sea.

We live
in a global
village;
had been 
watching

cricket 
from New 
Zealand
that morning.
Why couldn't

somebody
warn us?
The minister
says 
it was Poya Day,

a holiday.
Nobody saw
the message
from Hawaii.
What rubbish.

If we had known,
we could have
taken our wives
and children
on our boats

into the middle
of the lagoon.
They are
offering
30,000 rupees

to build 
here again.
What rubbish.
You see that tree,
that high high

tree, that's where
my aunt held 
on and she 
lived, my son 
lost.



ADJUSTMENT

We walk across railroad tracks.
It's late, the moon full, waves
roaring on the other side 
of coconut trees.  There 
aren't any goons asking 

for id's. It's 1980 or some 
such year before current 
flapping of metal wings, birds 
alloyed everywhere dropping 
pellets right on our foreheads. 

Aiyo, we say, how the hell,
 machan, don't buggers 
know how to shoot, and 
these poisons flowing 
in our blood.

What's become of older
weapons of war, when 
knife pricked or bomb 
blew off the head but 
left the next man alive 

to attend to his family
and the fight? Now 
cancer multiplies 
his cells and we should
not walk across railroad 

tracks or down on 
the beach off Galle Face, 
which today's children 
know as a high security zone,
and their older siblings

as no-man's land, lovers' 
folly, but we protest
too much, surely 
we can carry passports
in our bathing trunks?



CLIMATE

The odd jellyfish bothered
my editor. He seemed
out of sorts indeed, blue
and frothing from the sea
at Trincomalee. What

poisoned the urchin?
Or is he a fish? Certainly
the stanza and question
break above raises 
elemental gasps of horror, 

and I've been harangued
by a senior bard
for trying too hard
to be clever, and
yes, we should not

display bruised and 
most certainly odd
laundry on any line
visible to other members
of the human family&#8212;

who are not versed
in enjambment and 
holding breath
until the banks open
and the deluge begins

to snake round 
the block, the great
salmon run from 
pool to open sea.
Checkbooks

are now useless. 
Salmon have gone 
fishing. Acid rain 
falls in buckets and 
jelly fish have

turned odd.



FACE

Imagine half your face 
rubbed out yet
you are suited up
and walking 
to the office.

How will your mates 
greet you?
with heavy hearts,
flowers, 
rosary beads?

How shall we greet
the orphan boy,
the husband whose hand
slipped, children
and wife swept away?

How to greet
our new years
and our birthdays?
Shall we always 
light a candle?

Do we remember
that time erases 
the shore, grass 
grows, pain's 
modified?

At Hikkaduwa 
in 1980 I wrote a ditty, 
a sailor's song
about rain
in sunny Ceylon.

I don't know
what the Calypsonians
would compose
about this monstruous 
wave, this blind hatchet man;

don't know 
the baila singers' reply;
we're a happy 
and go people
yet the fisherman's wife

knows 
her grandfather
was eaten by the ocean,
fisher communities
have suffered in time;

and what's happened 
now is just another feast
for that bloody, 
sleeping mother
lapping at our island;

but what if the ocean
were innocent, 
the tectonic plates 
innocent, what if God
were innocent?

I do not know
how to walk upon the beach,
how to lift corpse 
after corpse 
until I am exhausted,

how to still the tears
when half my face
has been rubbed out
beyond 
the railroad tracks

and this anaesthetic,
this calypso come
to the last verse.
What shall we write
in the sand?

Where are gravestones
incinerated?  Whose 
ashes are these urned,
floating through the house
throttled by water?

Shall we build 
a memorial,
some calculated distance
from the sea, in a park,
in the shape of a giant wave

where we can write 
the names of the dead?
Has the wave lost 
its beauty, considered
now obscene?

Yet tomorrow
we must go to the ocean
and refresh ourselves
in the sea breeze
down in Hikkaduwa

where it is raining
in sunny Ceylon.
Tomorrow, let us 
renew our vows
at sunrise, at sunset.

Let us say, the next time
the ocean recedes
and parrots gawk
and flee, and restless 
dogs insist their humans

wake up, let us not peer
at the revelation 
of the ocean bed, 
nor seek photographs.
Let us run to higher ground,

and gathered there
with our children, 
our cats, dogs,
pigs, with what we've
carried in our hands

&#8212;albums, letters&#8212;
let us make a circle,
let us kneel, sit, 
stand in no particular
direction, pray

and be silent,
and open our lungs
to shout thanks--
to our gods-- 
thanks to our dogs. 



GLAD, IN TIME

The cats want to play.
They've all got tunes
in their heads, popping 
out of eyes and ears,

flounced on tongues.
Will you have me, Lick,
a bit of bother, 
smooth swing, 

cymbals shimmering. 
We're music, man,
players and pieces.
After us, what words

or dance steps
can distract the crowd
while we orchestrate
sound and body down&#8212;

yet the reviewer says
oh what an instrumental
as we walk past 40th 
and 10th on the way 

down to Hell's Kitchen, 
to the river, to write 
poems and fill  bottles, 
block up sea lanes

with our heart's cries.
Oh, stop the music,
stop spending 
the duracell,

atrophy and 
entropy, 
we're in the global 
soup, man, 

hotter by the minute, 
the kitchen's 
been franchised. 
Oh stop 

the poems!  
They only make 
the heart glad 
for a time.  



--------


anamika


THE 17 YEAR  OLD EXAMINEE
Stra Sal Ka…

Child,  when the milk first flows down  
from   the mother's breast 
she shivers with milk fever
That milk isn't very delicious 
but the doctors say  —
  If the child suckles
  then the baby will survive all diseases 

The taste of first failure is like that   —
Whatever happens,   it doesn't matter
(no dead-ends)
whatever you lose,  doesn't matter
there's no full stop in life
The desire to go beyond desire
too is a desire	
The process doesn't stop,  the road doesn't break apart 
They twine 
around your feet like a liana 
and when you come back home and take off your shoes
there'll be traces of them clinging to your socks
sorry about this strange world you've inherited
forgive me if you can
no one actually listens to the sound of flowers bursting open
no one sees with what skill and patience each petal unfolds 
This is the fruit market, child —  
fruitful and fruitless
I wish you could have inherited a world
where no one would have an identity divided and torn into different rows  

Every flower is beautiful in its own way
and beauty is beyond competition
You stay up all night your chair
all your work on your desk
watching the shrew on its catwalk
As you doze off you have a nightmare —
a shrew with an ounce
of jasmine oil on its head
and a buffalo
someone's playing a pipe to
all falling on deaf ears  a silk purse for sows…
and everything out of whack 
and at break of dawn,   a truck
loaded with bricks.
When the bricks fall
the nightmare comes to an end.

They make you sit up
and then you ask:
  Ma,  why this sorrow
  What is it?
  What to do with it?

These shriveled breasts of mine are wet,
not with milk
but with sweat
I'm not Mahamaya
nor is he Buddha  —
but the question remains
 as it is  —
In an old film song
there ran a line in  Italian 
    Che sara,  sara?
  ‘What will be,  will be'

Don't ask what comes next
Whatever happens  will happen for the best.
I sing out of tune and he breaks into laughter
   "Enough, mama,  enough
     I remember the rest of it"
This free laughter
in the dead of night
falls on the leaves like dew
His father,   worried about the future
smiles vaguely in his sleep
This half-smile of his gets the superserious house in a festive mood!

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



DALAI LAMA

The Dalai Lama continues to laugh
addressing
a large audience.

The interpreter is super-serious
has no time for laughter
The English was like a net
the Tibetan words butterflies
flew from the flower-petal lips of the Dalai Lama
sometimes to sit on the ears of the Tibetan kids
sometimes on the gold-flecked robes, 
maybe the wedding dresses
of the Tibetan women 
taken out only on special occasions
but worn away at the hems
this bit of sparkle left
like the trace of light  in aged eyes.

The Dalai Lama was expounding
on the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism
He raised his arm and 
like three little dots of ‘therefore'
there were the marks of childhood vaccination
peeping through his ochre robe.
They whispered:
   aha   someone is talking about such high principles
	but is from this very world
	this very epoch
	and he's just a  man.

Right in front of me, rapt,   a grandfather
on his shoulder  a chubby little boy and his gurgling (bottle )
wiping his running nose
on grandpa's sweater —
He must have been like that  —
the Dalai Lama
What do we know of Tibet  —
Rahul Sanknityayan or Rinpoches
monasteries and chow mein
cheap sweaters and sandals,  China,
snow, lost eyes,  round faces and faithful Lhasa Apso pups.

How do those noble truths
connect with
such random bits,
the ignoble truths of life?

Does truth too have hierarchies?
A Caste system?  —
Brahmin truths at the top 
and then the Shudra truths at the bottom?

Hunger and
thirst
heat and cold
attachment and cruelties
Love and hate  —
are these truths really lower?

Dalai Lama,  You tell me:  please
if the truth is like these mountain ranges —
high and low.
I prefer living in the deep cave of a small truth
occasionally coming to you
to learn the nobler truths of life.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



DECEIT
DoKa 

Some lies are stark white
as white as newly-born lambs
soft and warm,   teeny-weeny

Some are
pale-yellow petals
like those flowers in the vases you get in hospitals
They've got the laugh of a helpless father
when a child begs for a toy moon 
Mother pats him and says,  ‘ ok, tomorrow,
	now go to sleep."

Now is this deceit?

This life, like the gentle nodding of a drowsy child
pretending
to be asleep.
Now,  in my part of the world
we had a special dish called "deceit"
made out  of chickpea flour
but which looked just like a fish
Those who couldn't afford fish
cooked up this ‘deceit'
There ran a story that there was a guy who couldn't afford
delectable magur fish
So he sat with a plate of rice on the bank of the river
Pointing at the fish riding the wave
he filled his mouth, one ball of rice at a time,
telling himself:
	that fish
	and this rice
	this rice
	and that fish 

So then did he
cook himself up a deceit?
Even starving
people can serve up ‘deceit.'

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



DILEMMA
DuivDa

Dilemma
is a little bird
with a nest in the heart of a scarecrow,
sits on its shoulder and twitters and cheeps
a blue and yellowish bird
blue as the welts on someone's back
as pale a yellow as the girl
after the first time she got bawled out by her husband

pale yet as intent and firm
as a vow
In a rage,  the scarecrow sometimes shrugs its shoulders
One frosty night on his earthen pot face
there's a trace
of worry
and he asks —
in the same old boorish way 
like a misplaced fear
  
              I am a creature of wood
  inside my wooden being
  say,   bird, are you still there?

The bird replies:   
 
   Scarecrow of mine, I'm there
   still alive
   in the pocket of your tattered coat
   as alive as a ray of hope
   in spite of  everything turned upside down
   in spite of  everything gone haywire 
   in spite  of never finding what or who  we  waited  for … .

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



DOOR

I was a door
the more they banged on me
the more I opened up
Those who could come in,  could see for themselves,
the endless cycle 
this whirling grindstone
to the spinning wheel
to the needle
something or other,  all day long, nonstop

and then a broom
to sweep it all up
the stars, swept up 
mountains,  trees, and rocks swept up
all the shards and wreckage dumped in an empty basket,
tossed in the attic of the mind.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



GARLANDS ON THE THATCH ROOF

Chimneys, thatched roofs and fire-pots
play hopscotch in my grandmother's dreams
The smoke doesn't have anywhere to go
it spills out and then settles,  lingering under the bed,  
hovering between people.

Dried up flowers, leaf-packets,  leftover prasad,  garlands 
and things forbidden the touch of a broom
all balled up together and aimed at the thatch
till they got stuck there,  
left to shrivel up and turn into the five elements.

Whenever I look at her,  my grandma reminds me of those garlands  
poised in limbo on the thatch.
When my turn on the thatch comes,  
I won't just lie there, sad about it—
I'll make friends with the crows  perched  there  
have them recount the stories of Kakbhushundi
and ask them how Jayant-crow has been?
and one day,  I'll fly away on the wings of the crow of my choice
beyond all limits and limitlessness.
So what if they've got raucous voices
not just fair weather friends, 
at least, they come every day!

What good are those great artists
who like the koel,  every so often  make guest-appearances 
in low-budget films 
and lives.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



HANDS UP 

Doctors in films in the 60s
get down from their buggies
with someone else trotting behind them
carrying their bags
all-important,  with heavy footsteps
come to examine
the heroine's mother.

Stethoscope here,  there,
looking concerned,  lips pursed
they raise their hands to the sky
and say,  in a solemn voice:
      "now no medicines,  only prayers can cure her!"

God only knows what's gone wrong.
All of us,  hands reaching for the sky
stand defeated
Are we praying,
or 
has someone behind the scenes 
roared: 
	"Hands Up!!"?

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



HOMEWORK

I'm tired now,  mom
you do the next assignment
I don't have a clue what my teacher wants!

	to  "fill in the blanks",  she says —
	How do you do these,  son?
	This is an art I've never mastered
	I've always left blank spaces blank
	and, after all,  in a way
everyone's  life is crammed  with empty spaces 
fissures and dashes

But empty spaces are all haunted by ghosts of the past, mama,  right?

	Sometimes haunted too,   by ferocious ghosts of the present

 Then let's fill them in not with words, but with modeling clay

	The sky has already come down in the blanks
	we  can leave the spaces that way
		but the sky rushes in to fill in empty spaces
				
All these blanks then turn into sky,  ma?
	
It's because of those blanks,
	that the sky is so vast

all the voids in everyone's life
	leave the earth slowly behind, 
            rise and turn 
into the blue of the sky

Translation from Hindi by  Arlene Zide and the poet



KNOWING

Knowing someone is like buying another mirror for yourself
and another set of earphones, good ones
which let you hear distinctly.

After all, what does the  bhatkoinya  berry say as parting words
to the stunned silence of the fields sold away
If you listen closely,  you can even hear
the sad laughter of old prostitutes
like swabs of cotton  from some unknown mythic epoch
entering your space
you can hear rag jaijavanti  on the  ektara
of an ancient madman in the oldest asylum in the world.
You can hear the whooping cough of the prisoner playing his chains
to the rhythm of   ‘jhan-jhan-jhan',
playing on the rhythm of crimes done/undone.
and then,  you can hear the double entendre 
of all the established rules
and the soft thuds of languages almost dead
Each word difficult
but strong enough 
to pull you into the fold of the  mysterious naglok,  the world of serpents.
Deep inside the waters
sunk within  these waters
without a straw to hold onto 
slowly, slowly   turned  into serpent jewels:

Knowing someone is a passionate leap
first outside your being
and then deep within it 
It sends out ripples on the surface of the waters
over the pond for a long time.
Knowing someone is to become  pond, river, ocean and rain.
Knowing is a departure
Clouds rain once
trees three times
after every rain,  when you shake their branches
Knowing someone is like
gradually remembering 
all things,  forgotten, 
sunk deep in memory

Knowing someone is
becoming
trembling leaves
catching raindrops.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



LITTLE MAGAZINES

These are the squirrels of the forest
They slip beneath the door making their way into your house
In the afternoons they watch you dozing off
go around and inspect everything 
in every nook and cranny of your house
like  chowkidars 
see if everything's okay 

Along the trails of mythic time and space
they come to you
but seem inexhaustible 

quest-smitten,  always scampering,  restless
they come like CID spies
twirling the pollen-grains caught in their whiskers  
Their cummerbunds and belts, undetectable, done up in invisible boots
twisting their heads back and forth
always on the alert
aware of the meter of ‘pause and pace',  accented, unaccented
the movement of free verse,    
Clenching between their teeth  those straws 
people drowning in the river of time cling to —
Straws from broken nests
when the branches of history were hacked off.
the tree trunk hollows they come from
are where forest-goddesses
shelter their jeweled serpents
In the deadly difficult nights of the jungle
when the petromax of the moon fails
the jewels glow
like flashlights
	see how the hardworking squirrels
	scurry back and forth
still working to raise Rameshwaram's bridge
across the ocean.

Translation  from Hindi by  Arlene Zide and the poet



MOSQUITO NET

There was a town,  a small one
a little too hot.
The heat laid them all low / flat/ half-dead
Birds built their nests
on the blades of  the electricity-less  fans // on the blades of the useless/ unmoving/ 
lifeless/ frozen/ immobile/ motionless/ still fans
Even so,  there was a chaos /.racket/ hubbub/ din/ tumult of people  ,  still
The darkness was festive /alive with festivity / celebration 
Right/ Just  after sunset, the mosquito nets were ceremoniously hung  //hung 
with ceremony
one end knotted to the branch of a guava tree
one end tied to the nose of a latch
one end to a nail
and the fourth end into outer space
Old uncle moon
was a silver knot
tied to the net
One night a hyena came// there came a hyena
and shaken out of sleep,  the people ran away/ off
the mosquito nets
were left hanging
over empty beds
For years, they've hung like this
No one bothers to fold  them up
No longer can you hear the jingle of bangles
blue, yellow, red
size 2
Now, whenever a storm springs up/ comes (up)
the frames of the mosquito nets  tremble/ wobble/shake
but won't let them go	
like white toy kites   the nets fly up
bound on all sides

People turn over in sleep
on distant footpaths
Even in sleep their 
hoarse breaths tunnel
through their blocked-up / clogged / choked (-up)  / stopped-up  lungs
All night their rumbling sound,  gharr gharr, 
ghar ghar  1

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



Those who walk within confines are men,
those who walk beyond are saints.

MOBILE

No confines for me,   no confines
a closed fist is my boundary wall

I can go wherever I want
but in this man's pocket

I can connect to anyone anywhere
but always under his thumb.

Even when he's dead asleep
he'll tuck me under his pillow
listening to the tick tock tick of his wristwatch.
The whole night through 
quietly I'll keep all his messages
coming from all over the world.

Those silent messages will glow
in my dark spaces 
They'll glow like the cats-eyes
of my  dream-memories:
   Mother's ailments
   filed court cases
   all the office scuffles
   all the rush of unfinished kisses 
   all the muffled calls
the faint quivers of many a held-in sob all flicker within me. 
In me flutter the wounded wings of messenger-pigeons  
each feather yanked out  and flicked off one by one
once in a while, even a pat on the wing.
No matter how modern the world may be
the expression of love and hate are primordial.

I'm like the roads of old Baghdad
before the American bombings
Parallel to the modern malls
are the old  souks  and  the meena bazaar
glittering inside me
like archeological ruins dotting the heart of the metropolis.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



SNAP-BUTTON

My brother explained this to me:
Stars
are the snap-buttons sewn on the jacket of night.

In my part of the world,   snaps
were called chutputia
because with the click of a  ‘chut' one snapped into the other
They only worked when all four eyelets on both sides matched up.

They had no faith in the high and the low
Advocates of equality
neither hooking nor getting hooked up
came together without a fuss.

In my part of the world 
snaps  were called "chutputia"
but even the people from my part of the world
behaved like snaps.

No chutputia  here in this alien city
like  sweet gourd,  satputia  jhigune
you just can't find them,  can't find them anywhere.

chutputia people  and chutputia snaps on sari blouses,
tailors in the city sew on hooks,   not snaps
and there's always a gap
between the hook and the snare of the eye.
No matter how hard you try, no click of ‘chut'  and no  ‘put'.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



THE FIRST STATE-SPONSORED TOUR OF A WOMAN

She entered the hotel room
shook hands warmly
with her solitude.
The room was dark
Inside her too the pitch-dark of a well
Fumbled along all the walls
but no light-switch
A wide open door
just a trace of light from the verandah
A bearer,  passing by 
She looked at him, not knowing what to do 
He understood  
and closed the door  
As soon as the door closed
the lamps on the walls blossomed
in a lotus of light.
She wondered about 
the relation between shutting the world out 
and having your share of light
Stretched out on the yielding mattress 
still could feel the straw chattai of home
poking into her spine
Is every woman a princess then
and that pea
It's those ancient memories
that's the pea 
poking through seven mattresses
She had lots of things to read
instead leafed through the telephone directory
to find out the exact rates for an international call —
then spent all of her dollars
on three separate calls — 
first to her son:
	"Hello, hello, darling
	I keep remembering
	how you dozed off on my clothes in the suitcase.
	You are my dearest." 
	In each call  , she said  this,  both to her beloved
sitting irritably in his office imagining wild things 
and to her worried mother dropping pots and pans all over the kitchen.


Now she was held captive by the angels, brought before the throne of God 
     How dare she 
     use this tongue to call them all  her ‘dearest'?
  
God put down his pen and said   —
    After all, she's a woman,   
    All her dear ones are her ‘ dearest.'

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and  the poet



THE HUSBAND'S WOMAN

Like in the British Raj
The sun never sets

Here in this house
the sun's always ablaze,
scorching
even when the lord's away 
he's still there
in his claws, in his seal
in his towel, his walking stick,
his stamp papers, shoes and sandals,
in his drunken hiccoughs,  burping and his snores.
And his frowns, 
his threats and swear words.
Those are left behind.

He entered the house with a fierce roar
and in the very first round
she played dead
  like the man in the Russian folktale
  who thought the bear wouldn't pounce 
  on someone already dead.

Once someone told her:
	cowards die  a thousand deaths,
	the brave only one
Why should you play dead 
when you are not actually at fault?

After that she felt ashamed of dying every day.
Every day she hesitated for a while
and then decided
to play dead again
She thought — if I had to be a bird,
		 why an ostrich
		 and if someone had to sniff at me and catch my tongue
		 why a snake?

Later someone told her to read Gandhi
now when beaten black and blue she fasted unto death.
But,  the fifth evening, she started to expect 
someone to take notice.
In vain.

One day,  her reeling head in her hands
she staggered to the kitchen
and slowly pulled out
a stale chapatti
moistened it with the salt of her tears.

So friends,
such was the life of virtuous wives in Kaliyug …

The story goes on
and the last part from the mouth of the sati  herself.
	
I don't know what's happened
	can't get angry
	my heart is always as boggy as the soil
	after a heavy downpour on an unpaved road.
	He's got a lot of work
	and he doesn't even have his health
now he no longer has  the stamina
to shriek, or scold or even
 		beat me black and blue …

		In the end,  I too stand tamed
Now that he's ill,  why fight with a sick man
I've mastered forgiveness

Now even his snores sound sweet
I try to listen closely
to see if he's calling out from his dreams

Maybe he can't say it, but is holding it all back for now
some sweet secret,
something so sweet that I've been yearning to hear
something that will change the map of my life
and then there'll be a downpour
in this desert.

Translation from Hindi  by  Arlene Zide and the poet



"TO BE OR NOT"

"My marriage bed is above the noose" -Mirabai

This much English I learned to understand
the meaning of this line
but wish I could've learned Englishness well enough
to tie a knot in a noose, a tie,  
my shoelaces  too.
I can't even tie ribbons on right
again and again on my way to school  they came undone
the red ribbons at the end of my braids
	Really annoyed, my poor brother
each time he had to tie them back on
And now when it's my turn to tie a noose
it comes loose, opens up
like the amulet of folksongs.

"To be … or not to be …."  Shakespeare reminds us 
It's a whole ritual,  turning your sari
into a noose on the fan
It's not so easy to tie it on
There's a thick layer of dust on the fanblades
Before I hang myself, should I wipe it away with my anchal?

"To be dust,   or wipe it away, "  that's the question  
Where are  Birbal and Vidushak of the Sanskrit plays
The wise fools of Shakespeare, where are they?
Where is the sly wit  of Telani Raman and Gonu Jha?

I met you in dusty folds of the stories my father told me
Come, get up and see me off!
Come, let's giggle and gossip around the village fire
Let's light the flames, there's a chill in here
My skin's not enough;
will they wrap me up  —
my own warm ashes?
Inside my stiff bones burns a slow fire,
the sweet potatoes on it,  will they satisfy my hunger?
Will lye and phenyl quench my thirst?
"To be or  not to be …"
Tired out, both my kids lie sleeping
In the morning, will they be shocked  ?
The little one can't even comb his hair
and the big one, even worse
can't tell the right side of a sock from the wrong.
They‘ll  get up, try to wake me up
   ‘Missed the schoolbus and the milkman's gone home'
Everyone's gone home,  shouldn't I? 
Strange are the ways of this king's court
One sepoy holds me back by the wrists 
while another's ready to banish me forever
Yes,  Shakespeare,   I understand  
Understand this whole rigmarole 
of To Be or Not to Be.

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet]



TRANSLATION

People are going away
Each one from the other
People are going away
and the space around me is expanding.

I translate this ‘space'
not as ‘breathing space'
but ‘outer space'
because I sent my flying saucers out there.

Thank you,  time
my watch has stopped
Thank you, window
just behind the grille a sparrow 
is ready to lay her eggs.

Whoever, wherever, thanks to all of you
This is the time you ‘re all within me
I,  a little bit in each of you.

		The harmonium of my empty house
whines its moaning silence.
This empty time 
filled with work
This is the time when I  must translate
dirty linen into the dialect of water
Then a little while, stand still and think
if a sinkful of soapy water
can be translated 
into the melody of a  raga 
Frankly,  this whole house
I'd like to translate
into some other language.
But where will I find this language
except in the babblings of my children.
By the time I finish,  it's evening
I'll translate this evening into drawing the curtains
the splinters of last light
will fill up all the space
I'll translate those splinters
not into outer space
but into my 
breathing space.
		
Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



UNEMPLOYED

These days I'm reading only ancient scripts
Can manage to make out even the Harappan script
Every language is a language of pain
ever since I understood
I could read a message even
in the most obscure of languages
In my own infinite emptiness
this is the only thing I've done
I've learned the tottering notation of music
in every tone of pain.
There's a fire in me 
to write something on the pages of the wind
and then crumple them up and toss them under the broken charpoy
Unfolding these crumpled scraps, 
my mother reads them
and her glasses fog up.
This is where my fire gets transformed into water.

My bound hands are restless
they want to do something.
There's strength in them still.
Milk, they can draw from the breasts of the mountain
What if only a mouse turns up 
when you've dug it all up?

My bound hands are rough and cold —
they've never had the chance to sweep up the sweetness of the earth
Never has a  tattered dupatta  been held spread out between these hands
and laughingly begged those berries.

The moon is no longer that pale
There's a layer of dirt on its yellowness
it‘s as grungy as the grayed pages of a miserly bania's ledger
The sunlight slowly fading,
 like the tired, dusty beauty of an unwed elder sister

Hey, butterfly,     tell me 
how far is the last sigh from infinite desire.
This ‘should',    what kind of a bird is this?
Has it ever alighted in your courtyard?
perched on your hand?
So how can they say  
a bird in the hand is worth more
than two in the bush?

Wringing my hands, I often wonder
are my hands two flints
will they ever trigger  fire?
I never get a wink of sleep
My life is the chaos at a call-center
that might close down any moment,  who knows?

Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



WITHOUT A PLACE

This is how the shloka  goes —
    women, nails and hair
    once they've fallen
    	    just can't be put back
	said our Sanskrit teacher.

Frozen in place out of fear
we girls held on tight to our seats.
Place,  what is this ‘place'?
We were shown our place
in the first grade.
We remembered our elementary school lessons
	Ram,  Go to school, son, 
	Radha, Go and cook !
	Ram, here is your candy,son, 
	Radha,  bring your broom!
	Ram,  bedtime,  school tomorrow
	Radha,  go and make the bed for brother.
	Aha!,  this is our new house
	Look Ram!,  here's your room
	   	                                         "and mine?"
	Oh, little loony!
		Girls are wind, the sun and the good earth	
	They have no homes
				               "those without a home,
		 			     where do they belong?"

Which is the place from where we fall,
become clipped nails,  fallen hair trapped in combs,
fit only to be swept away?
Houses left behind, paths left behind
people left behind
the questions chasing us,  too   left behind.
Leaving tradition behind,
now I feel I'm as out of context 
as a short line
from a great classic
scribbled on a BA examination paper.

But I don't want
somebody to sit down and
analyze me 
to pigeonhole me.
At long last,  beyond all contexts  
it's been really hard
but I've gotten here.

Let me be hummed
like an abhang,
unfinished.
 
Translation from Hindi by Arlene Zide and the poet



WOMEN

We were read
like the torn pages of children's notebooks
made into cones to hold warm chanajorgaram  

We were looked at
the way grumpily, you squint at your wristwatch 
after the alarm goes off in the morning.

We were listened to
distractedly
the way filmsongs assail your ears
spilling from cheap cassettes on a crowded bus

They sensed us
the way you sense the sufferings of a distant relative
One day we said
we're human too.
Read us carefully
one letter at a time
they way after your BA,  you'd read a job ad.

Look at us
the way, shivering,  
you'd  gaze at the flames of a distant fire
Listen to us
as you would  the unstruck music of the void
and understand the way you'd understand a newly-learned language

The moment they heard this
from an invisible branch suspended in limbo
like a swam of gnats
wild rumors went screeching
  "Women without character
   wild vines draining the sap
   from their hosts 
 well-fed,  bored with affluence
 these women
 pointlessly on edge

 indulging in the luxury of writing
 these stories and poems  —
 not even their own,"
They said,  amused.

The rest of the stories dismissed with a wink



Hey,  Blessed Fathers
you blessed men
spare us 
spare us
this sort
of attention.



--------


kim_morrissey


SASKATCHEWAN …

… has more poets per capita
than any other province in Canada.
----Saskatchewan Culture of the Arts leaflet

Walking
on water is easy.

The miracle
is not in the journey

but in choosing
when to return.

On the prairies,
winter is about patience -

white falling,      
white falling on white -

moon
turning it blue.

Winter is silence -
all things dead

or dreaming
the beauty of nothing -

no colour, no smell,
no life.

The only warmth
ice on your tongue

the cold demanding
everyone be kind.

Everyone here
is a poet

the homeless
sleep in libraries

the abandoned
read between dreams.



To the Dead
for Dom

Move on. Change your friends.
Your job. Your family.

Sing sad love songs and change
all the pronouns.

Watch Late Night TV
and while you watch, read

bad novels, furiously, fingers
ready to turn the next page.

Avoid Talk Shows.
Don't write letters. Drink.

Fall down. Smile at strangers.
Cook with garlic

and onions.
Ring me. 

This time
I might
answer.



not drowning - Bloomsbury 2008
for Malcolm

In this group of wildly
cautious poets
organic is good, but

good elderberry port
goes untouched 
sloe gin is too fast

our motto is
nothing gained:
good

somewhere in Paris
Kiki is dancing

we are not there.



Lives of the Poets: Poets in Residence

The problem with artists as house-guests
Is they don't go away.
You can't fold them up in their suitcase
And take them down to the station.
They arrive with one bag or two of their own
And leave with three more of yours
And take you with them
To carry their luggage
And broken trolleys

All artists have bad backs.
So do I.

The problem with artists as house guests
Is they want you to listen to their rants
Over breakfast, through your favourite show,
At three in the morning when they
Come into your room with tequila and salt
And bounce on your bed.

The only time they are silent
They are tongue-kissing your lover.

The problem with artists as house guests
Is they are all larger than life
And spend most of it trying to end it:
I have nothing to live for,
Just let me die. Oh please, please please
I'd be better off dead
Until you agree

Or they cry because they can't have children
With you.

Artists as house-guests need feeding
Three times an hour
If you leave them any longer
You find them hungrily
Eyeing the baby.

The problem with artists as house-guests
Is when they sleep, they burn your carpet
Or their beards or set fire to your bed
Dropping lit cigarettes

They all cook either badly or well
But they all cook using every pot in the house
They drop fag ashes
Beating eggs for the omelettes
And roll joints for your mother

And after they wash up
All your non-stick pans
Stick.

And the damn thing of it is:

The problem with artists as house guests
Is that when, eventually, they go away
You miss them.



For Serena

You are there

baking for Christmas, siphoning
wine in the afternoon

laughing at The Singer Not the Song
your first schoolgirl crush

in Sales I see your colours:
Cinnamon, Spice, Terracotta, Rust

I put them back
for someone else

breathing in the Blackened Orange 
the small ache of cloves

Red Sand; Dust.


('for Serena' published in Painted, spoken, number 14 (London:Richard Price 2007)



ONE YEAR ON

The reading-corner you made me
is still there

bright red table, red chairs
picture railings, dove-grey stairs

still lit by west light

There are no sounds
in the house I remember

no one calling     no one called
no one there

the cedar of the floor still smells sweet

as the light from the window
turns to dark

('One year On' published in DIVERS (London: Aark Arts 2008)



IMAGINE ROSE DANCING

Rose Hacker's Dance Performance in Bloomsbury
February 24, 2007

Imagine Rose dancing
white lace at her throat
dark dress falling shoulders 
                               to floor                   

the lights catching stage dust
the slow curve of thin wrists

                               suspended

Rose dancing,
still turning heads
each breath that she takes
                                lemon-sweet

imagine Rose dancing
to one-hundred-and-one
imagine Rose dancing
                    and dance!



--------


aamer_hussein


A Rainless Place

1.
My father and my two older sisters shared memories of a distant place they'd lived in once. They'd talk for hours about Hyde Park and Stanmore, Selfridges and Bill and Ben the Flowerpot Men and Noddy, crumpets, and strawberries with cream. It was, to us, insufferably exotic (though we didn't know the word). At the same time their talk made my younger sister and me feel excluded, and even provincial. We lived in Karachi, a hot city, where we ate oranges, banana, mangoes, papaya and custard apples, only knew the oases and the sea, couldn't understand what strawberries or crumpets tasted like, and, lactose-intolerant, hated cream. And if my mother decided to join the others to remember that winter day when she'd walked on a pond sheathed in thin ice and fallen in, we'd feel even more excluded. Since our only picture of snow was what we saw on Christmas cards: in a place that hardly knew rain, snow was as alien to us as chimneys and Santa Claus.
Our father received the Times, in gauzy sheets, every two or three days, and he'd discuss ballets and pantomimes with my sisters: one of their most vivid recollections was of being taken to see Russian dancers perform Swan Lake at the Royal Opera. (For us, entertainment, in those times without television, meant films, puppet shows, amateur theatricals, fancy dress parties and fairs.) Father also had letters from abroad with pictures of the Queen on their stamps. 'Does she rule us, then?' We'd want to know. 'No,' my mother said, irate. 'Why,' we'd ask, 'do we call her a queen?' 'She's the Queen of England,' we were told. 
Was England in London? Was London in Pakistan? Or in India? We knew India was far away, because getting there required a drive to the airport, a wait in a lounge, a trip on a noisy plane, and a much, much longer drive into town once we reached Bombay. /p>
No, it isn't, it's much further than India, very far away. On that at least we could agree. 
We saw the Queen in 1960, I think, when I was about five. She wore a yellow-petalled hat and waved to hundreds of bystanders from a car. My English sisters were taken to meet her; we weren't. As I remember, I didn't mind; I'd be taken to meet Sirikit of Thailand and Zhou Enlai of China in years to follow, and would feel quite silly garlanding the latter and his wife on the steps of a plane. In England, our mother was taken for a princess (which she was, in a way, though she didn't like to be called that) or a movie star. (One day, she came across Louis Jourdain shooting for a film with Leslie Caron .She asked them for an autograph; they took out their pens and asked for hers). At home, she seemed quite normal, though she was diffferent from most people's mothers. People often gasped at her beauty when they saw her; she sang very well, and frequently drove her little car up one-way streets.
My oldest sister had every Enid Blyton book that had ever been published, and inevitably we read them as we made the transition from picture books to more grown up tales of adventure. But though I couldn't understand the food they talked about - marmite and potted shrimps - their picnics seemed very adventurous in comparison to our sedate family outings when adults and children drove off together to the seaside or some green place. Then, the thrill of their midnight feasts was something we couldn't replicate, as getting up to raid the fridge after midnight seemed an exceedingly tame act when the fridge was stocked especially for us with apples and pears and chocolates and cheeses, and some hapless servant might rise and rush to ask us what we needed, thinking we'd been underfed at dinner.
 But though the Famous Five made our life seem unadventurous by contrast., reading about England made me no more curious than I was about China or Estonia. The first foreign city I visited, at Christmas when I was nearly eleven, was Rome, which I had wanted to see: when the chance came at the end of that Italian trip to visit London or Beirut, I preferred to go to Beirut because it was on our way home and I'd heard London's temperature was below freezing. But Andersen and the Brothers Grimm and the narratives in the Old Testament and the Koran I loved , until and beyond the time I graduated to the Iliad and the Odyssey and Plutarch's Lives, and later, courtesy of my sisters, Shakespeare and Tennyson and Wilde and Shaw . Recently, I questioned a friend from Karachi who said her vision of the world had been shaped by reading Enid Blyton and other British children's books. 'How,' I said, 'when our mental landscape was so different, could we feel inspired by the exploits of Dick or George or Fatty?' ' Blyton made me curious about other places,' she said, and I could recognise that instinct, but my curiosity about the world was sharpened by those headier texts I read when I was older. 
Again, without knowing the word, I knew when I was about five that my father was a permanent expatriate. Born in Karachi, he'd grown up in many other places, and as a teenager he'd gone alone to England where he studied for several years, until in 1939 his father's anxieties about the war that was being waged took him away. Ever since, one of his regular residences had been a plane. And though he was very much a part of Karachi - it was hard to imagine the city without him, and when he was away on one of his very frequent trips, the space of his absence was larger than his presence, to be filled only by the extravagant gifts we knew he'd bring - he was always dreaming of other places. 
I am evoking my father with a lot of words that begin with exes - exotic places, exclusive memories, extravagant gifts - but the only one of these ex-words he shared with my mother was expatriation. My mother was more immersed in my father's native city than he ever seemed to be. Apart from getting us to school on time, often driving or collecting us herself, then overseeing our homework, there were charities, art exhibitions, fashion shows, diplomatic receptions and concerts. Or at home, the music lessons twice a week, or the occasional article she was bullied into writing by hand, and dictating over the phone, by my aunt or some importunate friend who worked for Dawn or The Morning News, that kept her busy from morning till, at times, after midnight. Then there were the huge family gatherings we hosted occasionally on Sundays, when all my father's cousins turned up for enormous meals. 
It was rare for our mother to leave Karachi without all of us in tow. Her expatriation was of another sort. We knew she'd moved here as a bride in 1948, gone with my father soon after to London, and when she'd come back a couple of years before I was born - I understand this now - she'd made every effort to recreate a semblance of the landscape she'd left behind . An early memory of the first house we moved to in the late '50s is of a truck arriving to plant grass in our barren yard - I may be inventing this, but I'm sure that they chose the house because it was on a hill full of hedges and wild flowering bushes, with soil more fertile than the sand and rock that seemed to make up most of Karachi. And when I said, one day, that I remember that the garden grew lavishly green overnight, my father laughed. I wasn't far from wrong, my mother tells me today: the grass - imported, she thinks, from New Zealand - was of the fast-growing sort . 
Try as she did, our mother's Karachi gardens could only create illusions of her native place: the air and the water were different. What we had was a case of artifice triumphant, making more beauty, perhaps, than the abundance nature allows. She had grown up in a region where vegetation was lush, trees very tall, and there were wells and running water at every corner. So the gardens she made combined natural resources - bougainvillea, cactus, frangipani, guava - with imported orchids and roses. The search for home was more a question of green motifs: grassy beds and shadowy places. In 1961 she moved us higher up the hill, to a house in which another expatriate had made a garden with terraces, arbours and bowers, and almonds and stunted orange trees in great coral-coloured pots, that probably evoked the greener places she'd left behind. 
My sister, with their Anglophile ways, were on the other hand participants in a very local noise and glamour. They reached their teens in the new house, in '62 and '63 respectively, and studied in the international milieu of the Convent of Jesus and Mary, where I, too, was sent at the age of eight. Two or three times a year they'd have parties in the garden to which all their school friends, foreign or local, came dressed and made up to kill, and danced till their cars came to take them home at the Cinderella hour. They inhabited some private city within the city, their own particular teenaged fairground. 
But to my mother the topography of sandy, stony Karachi , with its tall palm trees and stunted cacti, felt foreign: we were always tacitly aware of that. Of all her children, I at least inherited something of her estrangement from the city's climate. And all her children longed for rain as if we were born into intimacy with the rainy season, though we'd grown up in this rainless place: many of our games involved sprinklers, fountains, tubs and ponds to create illusions of the monsoon. Once when I was three or four there was a three-day downpour and the watermelon patch filled up like a pool, and we bathed with our mother in its tea-coloured water. It must have been in May. Sometimes, though, on summer days when the heat was overpowering, or dust storms forced the city to shut down for the space of an afternoon, or clouds promised rain for three days at a time and never delivered a drop, our mother would admit she was missing her childhood home. We'd plead with her to make plans for our next journey.


2.
The places she'd take us to we could share with her: unlike London, they were three cities we knew well, the only otherwhere we had, and more exciting to us than unknown England or Enid Blyton. There was Bombay, that big, messy city which, like ours, was by the sea, but couldn't be more different in every other way; it grew upwards, and was hemmed in by its waters, whereas in Karachi houses were houses, smallish and detached and enclosed in walled gardens, and the sea was miles and miles away from where we lived. But Bombay was entertaining. My mother's sister lived there: her son was two years older than I was, and in spite of differences of character, he would, for many years, remain the closest surrogate I would ever have to a brother. You could see the sea from all the windows of their second floor flat. My mother's childhood friend lived only a few minutes' drive away with her daughters, whom we loved as if they were of our blood, though we didn't even share a religion. They were in glamorous Marine Drive, on the face of the sea. 
More built up than our city, Bombay had cinemas a few moments' drive away from New Cuffe Parade where we stayed, and a club by a beach even closer to our block of flats; shopping for things modish or traditional was an hourly event. In Karachi, by contrast, we lived in fast-growing PECHS, a half-hour's drive away from the centre of town; getting to the cinema or the sea side was a long haul plan, and there was only a little market called the Nursery a short walk away from us at the foot of the hill, where everything from marzipan cakes to paperback novels and sanitary towels to sticky toffees and sharpeners with wiggly 3-D figures on them could be had. There was an ice cream parlour called Dew Drop Inn frequented by the more louche teenagers of the area, whom we knew as Teddies, in their skin-tight clothes; we could only drop in if we were in adult company, otherwise we'd have to send the driver in to buy us strawberry ice cream cones. No such strictures in Bombay, where cones could be had on every corner. It was as if we had strayed from a still and enclosed world into movement and expansion. Bombay people were louder and freer and more gaudy than we were, but also - at least, in comparison with the privileged class - spoke less elegant English, saw Hollywood movies and heard British pop (the Beatles, the Stones, and Sandy Shaw were more in vogue with us all then, in the mid-sixties, than American singers) later than we did; they still wore drainpipes when we'd migrated to flares.
But mother was always impatient to move on from Bombay. 
Another city we knew well was Gwalior, where my mother's sister lived. Family weddings frequently seemed to happen here, as her daughters married and left, one by one, and her son brought his bride to take their place. You couldn't imagine a town less similar to Karachi - the Gwalior house was an old white mansion with at least four courtyards, inner and outer, winding staircases, galleries and hidden passageways, surrounded by a babbling street busy with three-wheeled cabs, horse drawn carriages, and rickshaws. We had to switch languages here, practising our Urdu grown threadbare with disuse, with various members of the extended clan who would have found our English chatter a frivolous affectation. The city was surrounded by forest, ravines and rivers. Hunting duck and deer was a frequent pastime with women and men alike.(In her teens, my mother shot a crocodile; her older sister bagged a tiger.) There, we seemed to have gone back in time to the graciousness, the contingent rules and regulations of an era of noblesse oblige which, with all its sometimes welcome strangeness, had always been familiar from our parents' ways. But if, in Karachi, we'd tried to tell friends about riding elephants on wedding days, or shooting deer in bandit-infested forests, they'd have thought it all not only exotic but even more unbelievable than Enid Blyton. 
Then there was the town my mother missed most of all: Indore, her home town, which I mention last because it remains, to me at least if not to all of us, the most important. There, the passage to another time was complete, but this, rather than calendar time, was the time of fiction, though I only recognised this in my thirties when I became a voracious reader of Urdu novels. To the children we were, it was a story that we were living rather than reading, living and also writing to read later, as if it were a diary, when we were back at home.
My grandfather, the patriarch, had his domain on the ground floor, which was at once drawing room, study and library, where books from east and west sat side by side: Annals and Antiquities of Rajputana next to Hawthorne, Fitzgerald's Khayyam elbowing Plutarch and an Urdu translation of Firdausi. He also had a room upstairs, overlooking the garden , in which he spent time until an injection left him, that man who'd walked several miles a day, unable to walk without great effort. His den was the central room in the front wing of the ground floor, which led into the garden. To its left, if you faced it from the inner courtyard, was my grandmother's realm. She held court from her four poster bed, with her books and a few treasured objects beside her. Not averse to certain western innovations if she found them comfortable, she had opted for tradition in her own room. The fine carpet on the floor was always covered by a crisp white sheet, littered with fat cushions, on which her children, grandchildren and guests sat around her. The only western intrusion in this room was the easy chair, close to the always open door, that she kept there for my grandfather's frequent incursions into her kingdom. (Once, she said she was taking her afternoon nap when she thought he entered and sat down, and lit a cigarette; she smelt the smoke of perfumed tobacco linger in the air. She didn't hear him leave. A little later, awake now, she saw him come in again. She apologised for not having roused herself before. I wasn't here, he said. Another incident, also in the afternoon, took place when in her sleep she felt his hand play with her silver anklet, and opened her eyes to find no one there. )
In the courtyard was a room that stood apart like a little pavilion, which was occupied by my grandmother's sister, another wanderer who moved from town to town depending on the season. She was a widow, and the clan's storyteller. Fiction or fact, you could rely on her to keep the records, or straighten the twist in the tale. Among the romances she told over three afternoon sessions - she always stopped before sunset - were 'The Prince with the Needles in his Eyes', and 'The Patient Princess. ' (My older sister, a writer, would later develop and indulge a passion for collecting and retelling such tales.) 
 To the left of Grandfather's domain was my uncle's apartment, a little bastion of modernity within the timelessness of his family home. Furnished practically and smartly , it was remarkable, above all, for the range and number of books in it: in the bedroom, novels by Nabokov, Murdoch and Barth; in the study, volumes of Indian history, where I read enough about ancient and medieval times to get a high mark in an exam, without studying the set texts, when I was thirteen, and had then relocated, to a school which, though in India, was so far away in the South that it seemed to be in another country.
My uncle, like another of his brothers who lived far away in the Southern mountains and came home for summer and winter holidays, had chosen to be a teacher. He had three children, two girls and a boy. His oldest daughter was closest to my grandmother. Very tall with light brown hair that fell to her hips, her footsteps and her shadow seemed so essential to the corridors, courtyards and gardens of the house, that when, in 1968 at the age of eighteen, she left to marry our aunt's son in Gwalior, it seemed that, like my aunts before her, she'd take something away. Instead, she took something of Indore with her to her aunt's house, interlocking even more tightly the destiny of two houses and two families.
In some ways, life in Bombay and Gwalior resembled each other: drives, shops and the cinema, and always a lot of food. But the pace of Bombay was faster, and everywhere you had the sense of the city and the sea surrounding you; in Gwalior, the houses we visited were bigger, and often in quiet, leafy places, near rivers or lakes or hunting grounds. An endless cavalcade of guests and invitations was reminiscent of Karachi, but in Karachi you could have the occasional empty day too: not here.
In Indore, life's pace was tranquil, and for a city child restorative. You read, ate fresh fruit from the garden and honey from a farm on some family member's estate. Occasionally you drove to the centre of town. It was there that I discovered, at the age of nine, the numerous translations of Indian classics, the Ramayana and Kalidas's plays among them, that you could buy in cheap local editions from a bookshop called Rupayana, near the India Coffee House where, after your book-shopping, you could regale yourself on crisp dosa washed down with hot South Indian coffee. The neighbour's son, Kapil, who taught me to ride a bicycle and took me to see Hindi films on warm afternoons, remained my best friend for ten years, though I only ever saw him for two or three weeks a year, and would almost forget him when I went away. But every year he'd be there, in the courtyard, on his bicycle, calling out; and I would go down, take my seat behind him, and he would whizz us down the lanes into the centre of town. (Years later, something I said about life in a quiet place amazed a friend whose family was from Indore: 'It's a bustling big town,' she protested, 'not at all the sleepy place you remember').
	In Gwalior, too, there was a bookshop - Sahitya Sadan - where you could buy Indian books. Here there were cheap editions of nineteenth-century French novels as well as Indian classics: Zola's Nana or France's Thais lowered at you from under curtains of blonde hair, looking like Diana Dors or Belinda Lee in fancy dress. I think I bought my first copy of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire - an abridged edition - there. Such books nudged works by everyone from Sartre and Moravia to Pearl S. Buck and Marie Corelli and living Indian authors like Manohar Malgaonkar and K.A. Abbas on my aunt's bookshelves.

3.
I learnt to read randomly in Gwalior in 1964, carrying home an adult reading habit which my Karachi aunt, my father's sister, indulged by giving me My Cousin Rachel and Gone With the Wind 
when I was ten - the latter causing me to wake up at night in panic, thinking the Yankees were coming, especially when, later that year, war broke out between India and Pakistan. That season, my mother, who'd tried to inculcate a taste for Dickens and the Bronte sisters in us, bought me a handsome edition of War and Peace: better an epic than a pot-boiler, and a racist one at that, she must have thought. 
	The Karachi aunt lived next door to us. Widowed young, she'd reinvented herself as a member of parliament, travelled frequently to attend its sessions, and remarried a man who lived in Pindi and visited her rarely. The arrangement seemed to suit her very solitary ways. When she was at home, she lived alone with a cocker spaniel and two parrots, all given to her by our father. Her library had everything in it - in expensive hardcover - from Isak Dinesen and Iris Murdoch to Flaubert and Pasternak (chosen, my sisters were convinced, by the Book of the Month Club). I was summoned into her presence to share her supper of soup, grilled meat and two vegetables, followed by fruit or creamy confections. I was rewarded with a book or two to take away for a week She ran a glossy women's magazine which, at various times over about a decade, was managed by my mother and my two older sisters. We were taught to give her unstinting affection, since she had no children, and it took me years to realise how very little she had given any of us in return. 
	'When did you first miss Karachi?' My mother asked me not so long ago. 'Not Karachi, but the idea of a city of my own,' was my unpremeditated answer. It was long, long after leaving, when I'd spent half my life away, that I began to excavate a city sunken in my depths. The house and garden in Indore, on the other hand, and even the landscape of Gwalior, had always stayed in my consciousness. (When, in 1981, I'd revisited Bombay after a ten-year absence, it was as if I'd never left the place or the people there.) I do remember, at nine, on a trip through Bombay, waiting to go back home while the rain was relentless and my mother was lingering, but I knew it was late August, my father had taken my elder sisters home before their new term began, and the time had come for us to go. Was it my books I missed, or our house and garden? One or two friends, or the way I knew the city centre well enough to guide a driver anywhere I needed to go alone, most frequently a bookshop?( I knew the artery of roads and byroads around Elphinstone Street, Saddar and Bunder Road, all the cinemas and sweetshops and vendors of fruit and food, and was, under my father's expert tutelage, a seasoned shopper.) 
	But Karachi, which had given me my sense of city life, was never my only place; perhaps because of that I always felt slightly restless there. Was this, perhaps, a question of the city's rainless climate? Or the nine months I spent, cramped in my aunt's guest room, already an unwelcome guest in the city I should have called my own, while my mother struggled to stay on in what she felt was her children's hometown and encountered only resistance from many members of my father's clan, particularly his younger and most beloved brother? When my sisters and I left her there alone, before my thirteenth birthday, to join my father, it may have been to see whether we'd be happier, at least for a while, in our other monsoon world. For years I never looked over my shoulder at the city I had left behind. Karachi in the 70s and 80s remained a foreign place to me. When I went back for twenty days I was forty-one, and almost a stranger. I didn't contact my father's relatives, though one aunt forced me to meet some of them. ( A Nicosia-born friend of mine, when I told her that I felt more at ease today in Delhi than in my native city, said:  'I feel that way about Istanbul. I'm definitely Cypriot, not Turkish, and you certainly seem more Pakistani than Indian. You and are I easiest, I think, in places that let us feel at home but lay no claim to us.' Perhap she's right. But I'd slightly rephrase her words. I'm at my ease, too, in places that lay partial claim to me.)
	So what did I miss about Karachi in those years I never thought about it? Did I miss my father's Westernised, English-speaking relatives, with their Cambridge degrees and garrulous ways? We lived separate lives, in different, distant parts of town, they in Clifton, Bath Island and Defence, we in PECHS. Apart from those family Sundays, the two big Eids were the major occasions for the extended clan to get together. That was when we saw the relatives we referred to us The Sindhi Cousins, who were gaudier, bawdier, and far more loving then the Karachi clan, with a gift for feasting and a love of music which meant that they invited some renowned singer to perform at every festivity. In Karachi, worship seemed tied to the cycles of the day and the calendar: you prayed when you saw the new moon, which announced the coming of Ramadan and of Eid, as the rising of the light announced the time to commit yourself to the day's fast, and the setting of the sun announced the time to break it with another prayer. So there was, in my mind at least, a connection between the sky and the seasons and God, Who remained an exterior and primordial being. I remember only one Eid in Indore, which, apart from a visit to the mosque for the men and special sweets, was as quiet as any other day. My grandmother prayed, without any ceremony, five times a day, as did most of my mother's people. Looking back , I have come to see that prayer there had ceased to be a ritual to become, instead, reflection, an intense and private duty which brought your Maker closer to you than your jugular vein. Now, in London, I often read the prayers I do at night, in a room where leaves press against the glass in which I can sometimes see the sky reflected, while I am still contained within the silence of walls and windows. 
	In Karachi, every rhythm of the day was broken by the telephone. There was a telephone in Gwalior, too, but because people came and went without announcing themselves it wasn't often used: I do remember my aunt, though, interrupted in a Mahjong game, calling out to me: It's for you. (I'd been called by Nina, a girl my aunt didn't really like, probably to arrange an outing to the cinema.) I was about to turn fifteen, and I didn't know that I'd never see Gwalior, that girl or my aunt again. (And what is the loss of a place compared to the grief of losing people? Grandfather, grandmother, aunt, cousin--I took an interminable journey that severed me from all of them. It was only when my grandmother died that India called me back in a voice so loud I had to listen. As it calls me back, time after time. But let me count the ones I saw again, in London or in India -aunt, uncles, cousins, friends - to console me for the ones I lost.) 
	There wasn't a telephone in Indore. You read and you talked and you listened to stories and played in the garden and in the cool of the night you went for after-dinner walks along the leafy lanes. Then, refreshed, you left. I never felt I'd have enough of this life until, in my fifteenth year, I stayed there for two months, and started to long for cityness again. It was as if I were shedding, celll by cell, my reason for belonging. By then I'd spent eighteen months in that small town in the Southern hills, and tasted the salt of foreign cities - Rome, Naples and Beirut; I'd left behind my birthplace for ever, and already knew I'd soon be moving on, to live in the rainy city my father and sisters had made their own so many years before, the city I had never seen.



--------


li_li

 
Having a Relationship with a Chinese Man
    -for a young blonde lady 

He walks up to you. You hold his extended hand
When conversing do not look into his eyes
There is night there, and violence
There is a wall, corpses in a heap 
You share a meal. Watch out! Don't pour soy sauce
Over your rice. He will see blood spattered in snow
Don't ask what meat you are chewing
A smile will be his only answer  
When his umbrella shields you, don't say "I love you…"
He will stare at the exhaust pipes of cars
Save the "love" for in bed
You will hear drums from an ancient battleground 
Don't undress first. His limbs will lose composure
Well, strip then! If you insist on revealing
Your unbearable wound to him—love's face
A cry will escape his lips: Ah, ocean! 
Don't talk of the future, talk of now: the waves
Or ways of cooking fish. He will liven up
Close his eyes, sing like a hero in Beijing opera
"Streams flow, flowers fall, spring has run its course!" 
Don't say your name. Anna, Marie
In his ears, these names become
Aww—Aarh—Whaah--Eeehh
Opaque syllables, like Chinese to you 
Sounds of your name will get jumbled
Emma will become āi-mà [1]; Angel will become àn-jì [2]
But memory—the arm you showered with kisses
Will keep on embracing you, like the Great Wall you climbed  

      [1] Āi-mà means "suffer a tongue lashing" in Chinese.
      [2] Àn-jì means "prostitute in disguise" in Chinese. 



Traveling 

Awake before dawn—yes I, a train rumbles
In the mist. Smeared faces slide past me
By street lights and last night's lovemaking
My blood-suffused gaze fathoms the empty station   
Birdcalls in the native tongue of condemned prisoners
Scrawl their sounds at the window: "I want to go home!"
On the clock's snowy face, wolf of memory crawling
Gnaws on the flesh of a child who lost his way  
 
 

Li Bai on New Year's Night, 1997 

My Yellow River sunset has died out in Scandinavian woods
In Stockholm suburbs, I place wine on the snow
Moonlight goes adrift
I drink, the bark of malicious dogs becomes a whisper
I drink, my forsaken palace shows through heartless markets
Ah, home—it seems so close: half of myself a crazily dancing shadow!          

 

Resume

Name 
A symbol. Has been interrogated
Interrogation will continue. From birth! 
Translation? Rain has no conception
Of the chill that snow experienced 
Fated to suffer interrogation
Like a pushed-over gravestone 
Address 
In Chopin's nocturnes
Or in the starry heavens that come with drinking 
Nationality 
Hate myself, the language
In this skin—justification for enduring war? 
Faraway place, in another time
I would surely be you 
Birthplace 
Seaside. Heaven for masks
Neon on a manhunt for the moon  
Man sitting in sunlight
Watches a cloudburst of coins from the sky 
Birthdate 
Night below freezing
"You should really have been born in May" 
Marital Status 
Caressed three flowers
Got a feel of three thousand winters

      

Level of Education 

A certain tree. I stood
Beneath it. Spring! 
Birds are singing. When I left
Birds were still singing 
Birds, leaves
Disappear when I return 
Ah, such beauty!
I see every tiny branch and scar 

 

Chinese Calligraphy 

Morning and evening
Swirl around an inkbrush, become black characters
With mother's instruction: "All is contained in this.
Diligent practice is the route to enduring art!"
Rain lashes all the closed windows
And mistakes made behind them
I go journeying with the same kind of ink
Heaven and sky, why the same meaning?
Clouds laugh without giving answer
Sift down flakes as large as goose down
Putting giant inksticks on exhibit
All is contained in this
An inkbrush reincarnated for a thousand years—I keep writing
The land exhibits characters written by the dead
The sky gazes down upon them
Quickly it lays out a vast sheet of rice paper.
Continue this diligent practice! 
 
 

Paris in an Instant

The oceanic Louvre—let us put down anchor in coffee
But dusk would have us set forth
The Seine! A seventeenth century bridge. A young woman
Leans at the railing. Palaces, spires, afterglow
Inky green plane trees—she is the centerpiece
Of this monumental city—a rose in your eyes
Holy mother in your heart—suddenly
Down
She plunges, like a parcel. Bells of Notre Dame
Toll down the darkness of heaven 

 

Kafka in January 1989

Walled city streaming with people. He stands
At the station exit, a pair of bashful eyes 
"My name is Kafka" He steps up to help with my bag:
"I am willing to be your guide!" 
We look into each others eyes.
I follow him. This kind of following is reading 
Coal no one wants is strewn about---snow in drifts
A trolley crawls along dragging dejection 
Leftward, rightward, straight ahead
I follow him. I am his shadow 
"That metal-domed building is the opera house,"
Says Kafka with a smile, "But it is closed." 
The old city. An imposing bronze stature
"That is Jan Hus…..500 years ago…" 
A Nikon is slung at my chest,
Kafka narrows his eyes to look 
"This thing…what does it cost?"
"Umm…not quite 900 dollars" 
Kafka's eyes shoot stars
Scenery spins a roulette wheel around him. Where am I? 
"Sir, would you care for some coffee?"
Kafka sees the giddiness of his counterpart----the reader 
At the mention of coffee, before us appears
A coffee shop, baroque in style. We walk in 
"Check your coat, this place is heated
And your camera…is too heavy to carry!" 
We sit down. The Prague-style coffee
Initiates an East-West dialogue 
"May I ask, have you been to Beijing?"
"No, but I think Beijing must be an even bigger fortress…" 
Silence. Stimulating coffee
Savors the chance encounter of two strangers 
"Please wait a moment!"
Kafka's tone is severe. "My father 
Awaits me across the street"
With that, Kafka walks away. With that, Kafka is gone for good! 
From the Charles Bridge, a scene like in a painting
I gaze at eddies under the bridge 
A seagull circles over my head
"I am Kafka. I took away the camera 
That turned you into a beetle. Due to me
You will break away from lingering in this fortress" 

 

--------


peter_esterhazy

CELESTIAL HARMONIES
Translated by Judith Sollosy

BOOK ONE

Numbered sentences

from the lives of the Esterhazy family 

1.

It is ducedly difficult to tell a lie when you don.t know the truth. 
 

2.

To kick off a text with a ferocious looking baroque grand seigneur is gratifying; a thrilling, tingling sensation thrills our bosom, our computers greet us in passing, and our cook, because why shouldn.t we have a cook (who we?) serves us . a surprise! . breaded lamb.s tail, which is like calf.s foot except it.s more savory because it.s more fragile and tender; my father, this ferocious looking baroque grand seigneur who was in a position, nay under obligation, to raise his eyes to Emperor Leopold, raised his eyes to Emperor Leopold, on his countenance an expression of solemnity, though his eyes, twinkling and mischievous, belied him as always, and he said, It is ducedly difficult, Sire, to tell a lie when you don.t know the truth. Having said that, he leaped upon his chestnut steed, Challenger, and galloped off into the discriminating 17th century landscape (or description thereof). 
 

3.

My father, it was presumably my father who, with his painter.s palette under his coat, sneaked back in the museum, stole back in, to retouch the paintings he.d hung on the wall or, at the very least, to effectuate certain emendations thereof.  


--------


carol_moldaw


64  Panoramic Way

Like  easy conversation,
rambling, obliquely angled,
the winding street traverses
the steep residential hill.

Stone stairs ladder-stitch
the street's tiers; every few
rungs open on terraces,
windows glinting through hedges,

sunlight feathering grass.
At the first switchback,
pine needles tufted with dog fur
pad up the wide cracked steps

leading to a cottage and two
ramshackle shingle houses.
From the lintel of an illegal
basement apartment, magenta

fuchsia, silent bells,
bob and sag over a pot's rim.
Higher, up wooden stairs
built over rubble, we climb

to the top deck. What was
our garden now grows wild
onions' white flowers,
and butter-yellow weeds--

winter's mohair throw
draping a bare mattress.
By late spring someone else
or no one will be bending

to pick cool herbs
like single guitar notes.
Something knots in my throat.
Indecipherable

decibels begin jackhammering
inside #D--our old address.
Black Sabbath? Iron Maiden?
I know our own records

by the first chord. Pounding,
we try the unlocked door,
and pick our way through
a year's domestic fallout:

dropped clothes, album sleeves,
mattresses blocking entrances,
plates, cups, hangers, books.
I trip trying not to look.

Waving on the balcony,
an old guest, now our host,
offers us the view.
At this time of year,

no yellow beach roses 
tumble the latticed railing,
no draft of honeysuckle,
no bees flitting near their hive.

Cars nose around the hairpin turn.
Looking past Berkeley's hazy
flat grids,  past Oakland,
you can see, as if you've flicked

a painted fan open, a striped
spinnaker tacking the wide bay,
three bridges, and San Francisco
shrugging off her damp negligee.



Report

The articulation of my bones
a bird's, I woke not just not knowing
where or who but what I was:
my opened arm a wing in which she rested,
the two of us fuscous and fused
in the feathery half-dark
until that consciousness that's always
roving, testing, that's roving now,
striving to assemble an accurate report,
probed further into the feeling
and found me made of string and straw,
bits of silky floss licked together,
a nest shaped to fit her unfledged shape,
an account of ourselves I accepted
until daylight pried apart the louvers
and I discovered myself fingering
the soft stubble of her shaven hair.



Studies in Pen and Ink (#5)

The strawberry daVinci drew in cross-section
on one side of a notebook page bleeds through 

to cushion a fetus floating on the back.
By now, the ink has browned, the paper's cracked,

dimly lit, encased upright and displayed 
in glass for us to circle, case after case

of notebook pages we pause before and pass 
in accelerating knots and curlicues--

the coition of a hemi-sected man 
and woman no more absurd or accurate

than a flying machine. A tube from the testicles, 
the seat of ardor, leads straight to the heart.

Once, in a videotape of surgery,
I saw fimbria wafting in the body's fluid

like seaweed under water. The ovaries looked
like sponge or coral. Here, the woman's heart's

a dial. I hear my own timer ticking,
ticking fast, the parts dissected, tagged,

and reassembled, but never yet disarmed.
Or detonated. Here, here's the blueprint,

recto and verso, marked up in mirror script.
The deeper I delve, the more I feel objective.

Pushed by the crowd, we rush through in under an hour:
a living page, one of the studies on water.



The Butterfly

        	"The eye follows the hand,
        	 the mind follows the eye,
         	the heart follows the mind."
                       		 --from the Natya Shastra


With no appreciable weight,
a butterfly alit

and rode my finger
an hour or longer.

Holding my hand ahead,
I let the butterfly lead.

We walked down to the kill,
its wings an upright sail.

I was almost afraid to breathe,
but my feet knew the path:

its trippy roots, the snagging branches
with springs like rocket launches.

I sat down on a rock.
I couldn't believe my luck.

The world right then seemed kind,
with a butterfly on my hand,

its bronze wings spread flat,
pulsing to raise its body heat.

Like a fluttering eyelash,
it tickled the web of flesh

between forefinger and thumb.
"My life can never be the same!"

I thought, studying the leopard spots
of its eyes; its veins like pleats;

its scalloped scales; its legs,
six knobby little twigs;

the thorax's fuzzy patina;
the two slender antennae,

bulb-tipped, like matchsticks;
and the pointed black circumflex

markings on each scored wing:
accents from the mother tongue.

Its proboscis sipped 
the salt from my hand and tapped

out a secret code,
the secret names of God,

invisible to man,
imprinted on my skin.

If I could have become a fern--
a stone--a stalk of corn . . . .

Instead, my left hand twitched
and the butterfly detached

itself, all in a breath,
my article of faith,

momentarily tame
as if out of a dream,

now circling the rock,
not coming back.



The Peony

A man cups his fingers as if to bring them
to his lips to blow me a goodbye kiss,
or, as if he were Italian, to underscore
his words. He is not Italian; he is not
speaking; and he does not bring his fingers
to his lips. Gravely, they descend upon a peony
held up by the rim of its fishbowl vase.
Because I would be his, he tells me a secret
it is mine to know, all the while spreading
the silky petals with his slowly opening hand
so that the peony is made to bloom to its fullest, 
until it is an open globe, overbrimming the vase.
Only now do I think of those paper flowers
that blossomed when we floated them in water,
as girls. The words of the secret blurred
as soon as I woke, but his light hand 
gravely forcing the peony, that remains.



The Widening
   At the crucial moment she said yes. His hand in the back pocket of her jeans had made her wet--but nothing and no one had prepared her. They were on her bed, at boarding school. Naked she was self-conscious, and self-conscious she was timid. He would know what to do if only she let him. She remembered letting herself be kissed when she was twelve, pulled into the bushes by a classmate, happily ambushed, but sure right up until the moment his lips pressed hers that she would not be kissed, no matter how long they sat nested in the shrubs, because it was forbidden. He dug in, the sharp pain snapping her out of her reverie, and knowing she could not bear it if she conceived, and she said no, pushing his shoulders hard with her hands. At once he was out, up, and through the door. Why had he left? In the bathroom, she looked and saw what she'd heard she'd find: blood. Her body pounded and throbbed, with the widening had come a great unremitting pressure on her bones and she ached inside. And that was it, she'd lost something she'd not examined having, something that until then had seemed irrelevant, illusory.



--------


bas_kwakman

Poetry International Web is a website for outstanding modern poetry from many different countries. The site makes poetry accessible to a worldwide audience by publishing poems both in the original language and in English translation, accompanied by interviews, essays and further information. Poetry International Web is a remarkable cooperative effort of editors from twenty-one countries worldwide. These editors are well-known and respected professionals within their field. The project is coordinated from Rotterdam. The website has grown into an internationally acknowledged resource for outstanding poetry since its launch in 2002, and is widely perceived to be unique in its kind.

Goals

Poetry International Web (PIW) aims to propagate outstanding international poetry and the translations of such poetry. By using the internet, with specific means such as visual elements, audio, links and other interactive elements, PIW is able to publish poetry and exchange information about poetry worldwide in an attractive way. PIW intends to expand and make international poetry even more accessible, by adding new elements (audio, video, interactive elements) to the site and stepping up its publicity campaign. The website is set to grow with many more countries and will keep increasing visitors. numbers: so far over a million visitors have been counted, with an average of 3600 visitors daily.

Activities
The most important tool for reaching these goals is PIW.s monthly online magazine. Each month, the partners of PIW publish a magazine on the site containing new poetry, background information, poets. biographies, essays, poets. diaries and discussions. Creating a poetry magazine on such a international level is unique in Europe and the rest of the world.
The magazine allows visitors to see the international, social, cultural, political and literary context of the  poems published on PIW. More audio and video fragments will be added to the site, and the magazine will also feature e-poetry and other recent developments in poetry.

Countries
PIW at this moment has thirty-seven country domains: 


Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Belgium
China
Colombia
Croatia
Denmark
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
India
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Morocco
Poland
Portugal
Slovenia
South Africa
Sweden
The Netherlands
Turkey
Ukraine
United Kingdom
USA
Zimbabwe




--------


thomas_e_kennedy

an excerpt from the novel, Danish Fall by Thomas E. Kennedy, published in 2005, First Runner-Up for the 2007 Eric Hoffer Book Award, General Fiction Category.  This excerpt was also a Finalist in the Glimmer Train "Very Short Fiction Competition"
									


FATHER AND SON


	Brandt rose at six-thirty and woke his son who asked to be allowed to sleep for another fifteen minutes.  He lit the oven in the kitchen and went out to the bathroom, washed his hands, rinsed his mouth, returned to the kitchen, halved two sesame sandwich rolls and put them on a pan beneath the now orange-glowing grill.
	He shredded and washed crisp leaves of lettuce, cut thin slices of ecological tomatoes, then removed the rolls from the oven, juggling them from hand to hand not to burn his fingers, and lay them open on the cutting board, buttered them top and bottom, all the way to the edge as his ex-wife had taught him, applied Muenster cheese, thinly sliced lunch meats, Dijon mustard, lettuce, tomato, cucumber.
	He pressed the top of the sesame roll down onto the sandwich and wrapped it tightly in cellophane paper, placed the two tight thick cellophane-wrapped sandwiches into a plastic bag with a sheet of paper towel, a tiny envelope of salt and pepper, a quarter dill pickle, also packed in plastic, and a mini-candy bar or two – Milky Way, Three Musketeers, Mounds – which he purchased in large quantities from the Grand Union.  He tied off the mouth of the bag with a strip of paperized wire.
	Then he went in once again to wake his son who asked for another fifteen minutes.  Brandt used that fifteen minutes to wash and shave and dress, then woke his son again, and they sat at the kitchen table by the window over freshly squeezed orange-grapefruit juice and a thermos can of freshly brewed ecological Brazilian coffee.
	Brandt shook a multivitamin and C-vitamin from the two jars which always stood at the end of the table and lay them alongside his son's juice glass, watched with pleasure as the boy dashed them into his mouth, swallowed them with the high quality juice, sighed with pleasure at the taste.
	He asked if the boy would like fruit – a banana, half a grapefruit, a few slices of cantaloupe, honeydew.  The boy took a banana, peeled and wolfed it down.  Then he poured coffee from the thermos pot, laced it with milk and sugar, slipped a cigarette straight from the pack in his breast pocket and lit it.
	Brandt regretted this profoundly.  He himself had smoked at that age and for nearly twenty years hence, but quit the day his son was born.  He had feared the boy would think smoking was desirable and acceptable if he saw his father doing it.  So Brandt took the cure, got fat, but never again lit up.
	Two years before, Brandt caught the boy in the mall with a Lucky Strike nonfilter wobbling between his lips.  Brandt begged him to stop.  The boy explained that he didn't really smoke, only bummed an occasional butt from a friend to feel like one of the guys.   Then Brandt caught him again, twice, and then began to smell it on his clothes that he washed on the weekends and began to find crumpled Lucky Strike nonfilter packs in the garbage bag beneath the kitchen sink.
	Brandt was very sad about this.  He said to his boy, "What can I give you to make you quit?  You name it."
	The boy shrugged.
	Brandt said, "Let me give you a piece of advice, son:  You could kick it now, right away, easy as pie.  If you don't, within a very short time, you'll be hooked, addicted, and it will ruin your health, son."
	His son stared at him for a long moment.  Then he said, "Fuck you, Dad.  Keep your advice to yourself.  I'm not interested in your advice."
	Brandt's eyes filled with water.  He could not believe what he was hearing.  He remembered his own father had given him permission to smoke when he was fourteen, had even given him permission to help himself to the cigarettes in the carton in the pantry.  People didn't know in those days how dangerous it was.  But tobacco hardly seemed the issue now.  He could not believe his son had spoken those words to him.  With a quiet smouldering anger, the boy had addressed him with those words.
	"I only want to help you," Brandt said.
	"I don't want your help," his son said.
	Later in the day the boy apologized.  Brandt allowed that he understood how he felt.  He too had smoked.  Slowly they accommodated each other.  The boy asked permission to light up once or twice a day for a few weeks, and then it became a part of their lives, and now he lit a cigarette each morning over their coffee.
	In truth, Brandt had to admit that the memory of that moment when his son said fuck you to him was fascinating, even cherished.  He could remember practically every detail of it, the way the boy's eyes had suddenly narrowed, the way the mask of his face had seemed to decompose, the force of emotion remolding it as his lips formed the words that flew with a fine spray of spittle on his breath.  He felt very close to his son at that moment, felt as though they were sharing something of great power, even if it was tinged with brutality.
	Once he dreamed that the boy was Jesus Christ and tore asunder his breast to reveal a heart of crowned thorns on which were emblazoned the words, Fuck you, Dad.
	Sometimes over breakfast he and his son shared their dreams with one another, although Brandt never managed to find a way to share that one with the boy.  They told each other about the odd conglomerations of detail that clustered in their sleeping brains the night before.  When they shared their dreams, breakfast was a cozy time.  His son once dreamt of a white man with a white beard on a white bench.  Brandt once dreamt of meeting his father on a strange deserted street and being amazed to find him alive again, though he was much smaller than he had been in life.  During these cozy breakfast times, Brandt almost felt like lighting up himself, like sharing that, too, with his son, but of course, he did not.
	They chatted, drank coffee, looked out the round window in the slanted wall at the corner of the kitchen.  The window made Brandt think of a porthole in a boat, and it was pleasant to look through the round glass to see what kind of weather the day might offer.  
	Reluctantly Brandt kept track of the time.  Now he glanced at his watch.  "Quarter to eight, son."
The boy groaned and reached for the clear plastic bag on the table with the two sandwiches and napkin and pickle and mini candy bars.  "Thanks for lunch, Dad," he said. 
"Was it okay yesterday?" Brandt asked.
	"Perfect.  Delish," the boy said, and Brandt felt blessed, delivered from the sadness that his marriage had failed.  Brandt had so many happy memories of his boy's childhood.  He wished that his life had more meaning so he could share that meaning with the boy, but how could he explain to him that the only real meaning life had for him was that his work enabled him to provide the boy with food and shelter and clothes and an education, though he did not know for sure where these provisions would lead the boy, to what kind of life.  Everything seemed all broken into pieces, dead grandparents, divorced siblings, divorced self, divorced cousins, emptiness, fragmentation.
	Perhaps Brandt was the only one who felt life was empty, the work life.  Perhaps to his son, it would be meaningful in the way that his own life caring for his son was meaningful to Brandt.  He certainly hoped so, and it pleased him immensely each morning to see the boy swallow his vitamins, his freshly squeezed juice.  It pleased him to see the boy pouring milk into his coffee, spooning in sugar, stirring.  These were positive things, the actions of someone with an appetite for the day.
	Brandt watched his son put the lunch into his knapsack in which he carried his books as he bicycled to school.  Brandt stood at the door of their little house and watched the boy swing his leg up to mount his bike.
	"Have a good day, son," he called.  "Love you."
	"You, too, Dad," the boy called back, "Love you, too," and Brandt watched him cycle off on strong legs, standing on the pedals to get up speed, signal and turn at the corner, Brandt's hand poised to wave in case the boy looked back.
	Brandt didn't have to be in until noon today, thank god, and decided to use the morning to clean up a bit, get a head-start on the weekend chores.  He went into his son's room to gather laundry for the wash.  From the floor, beneath the bed, beside the dresser, he gathered socks, pajamas, tee shirts, underwear.  He glanced into the closet.  Behind a carton there, he noticed something curious, a kind of duffel bag, its top puckered slightly open so he glimpsed something green and brown wrapped in plastic.  He looked closer and saw it was lettuce on bread, closer still and saw it was one of the lunches he had made for his son, the bag torn open but the lunch intact.
	Stooping, he stepped deeper into the closet and reached for the duffel, saw both sandwiches were there.  He pulled open the top of the duffel, and the stench of rot touched his nose.  He gagged.  The duffel bag was stuffed full of sandwiches.

	
"May I ask why," Brandt asked the boy that evening, "you didn't just tell me you didn't want the sandwiches?"
	The boy looked blankly at him.  Then," I don't know," he said from behind that blank expression.
	"Every day I asked you how was lunch and every day you said delish, thanks Dad.  And you weren't even eating it."
	"Sometimes I did.  Sometimes I ate it.  But a lot of times, most times, I just wasn't hungry."
	"Did you think you were doing me a favour?  Letting me make sandwiches for you?"  He asked this sincerely, without rancor or accusation, he so wanted to know, to understand.
	"No," the boy said.
	"Then why?"
	"I guess I just didn't… want to rock the boat."
	"Why didn't you just throw them out, then?  Why did you keep them like that?  In your closet?"
	"Well…"  The boy squinted, as though trying to peer deep into his own mind.  "Well, you never liked us to throw out food."
	Brandt stared at the boy, at the way his lower lip hung wetly.  Was he trying to provoke his father?  Brandt spun away into the kitchen, swallowing, drawing draughts of air into his nostrils, his lungs.  On the kitchen counter lay a half empty plastic bag of sesame rolls.  His eyes lifted to the round window in the corner of the room.  That sense of looking out the porthole of a boat became intense.  A dizziness rose in him, and the floor seemed to tip, the one way, the other.  He reached in fear for the edge of the table to steady himself and hollered out, "Son!  Son!  Come help me!"



--------


renate_dorrestein

When the doorbell rang at half past two in the morning, she'd thought Jem must have forgotten his key.  She had stumbled groggily down the stairs as she shrugged on her dressing gown.  He'd be standing outside the door grinning sheepishly, with Sanne, for whose sake he had left his baseball cap at home.  To have to rouse your mother from her bed was a pretty bad blunder.
Two police officers stood on the threshold.
"Oh heavens," said Franka automatically: her entire roster of juvenile clients flashed through her head.  Now who was in trouble?  She put on a professional expression, patted her hair and said, flipping through her files in her mind, "What can I do for you?"
"Mrs. Vermeer?"
She nodded impatiently, wide-awake now.  Phinus always hated it when they were woken up in the middle of the night.
"May we come in for a second?"
She walked ahead of them to the living room, hoping they would lower their voices.  She turned on the light.  She gestured to the chairs around the dining table.
The men remained standing.  "Is your husband home?" asked the taller of the two.
"Yes," said Franka, "he's sleeping, so perhaps we could keep our voices down."  She pulled out a chair, sat down and mechanically started moving some things around on the overflowing table.  A newspaper, a coffee mug, a library book about dinosaurs that belonged to Jem.
"You had better go wake him up."
She felt the urge to laugh.  Phinus would rather... why should Phinus... Then her stomach did a somersault.  "Jem?  It isn't Jem, is it?"

There was from the outset an invisible script, with a clear division of roles.  Franka was the Mother.  Phinus was designated as the Spouse.  Jem, the Victim.  An important supporting role was reserved for Sanne (the Witness).  It was just like a game of Cluedo, except that it was real.

The Mother and the Spouse first had to identify the Victim.  The Victim had been shot through the head, three times at close range.  There was nothing left of the eyes that used to look out at the world full of interest and trust, he was now someone without a smile on his lips.
The Mother said, frantically: "It isn't him, is it Phinus, it isn't him, it's only someone wearing his clothes."
"Right, they could have been stolen!" said the Spouse.  "He was mugged in an alleyway by a junkie or something..."  His voice died away.  His shoulders were shaking.
"Look!" said the Mother.  "He's got gel in his hair!  Gel!  That can't be Jem!"  She grabbed at a lock of hair on the side of the bloody blob, she licked her fingers and mumbled, "Gel!  That's made from bones!  Our Jem would never..."  She jerked her head around, towards the watching, set faces.  "Our Jem would never..."
The Spouse, standing in the corner, was shaking his head, stupefied.
After that they were both given a cup of coffee.
They signed forms.
They were taken from the hospital to the police station.  There they sat on identical orange bucket seats in a neon-lit space that was pretty much identical to the first, waiting for more business to be conducted behind their backs.  They held each other's hands and let go again.  They began sentences which they never finished, while in their thoughts they frantically tried to reconstruct the Victim's face, to piece it back together out of the pulpy mush they'd just been shown, to fashion a face with a name and a history out of it once more, but then they'd find themselves unable to catch their breath.  The Mother desperately dreamed up one rescue scenario after another, all completely futile by now.  For instance, she thought, If only I'd been wearing my track suit tonight.  That's the kind of outfit that will notify fate that you're alert, that you're on your toes, that in an emergency you won't let a second go to waste!  Why oh why didn't I wear my track suit?  She said, elbowing the Spouse in the ribs, "Why didn't I wear my track suit?"
The Spouse was sitting slumped over in his orange bucket.  Instead of answering, he repeated for the twentieth time, "Have I understood correctly?  Have I understood correctly that he was trying to intervene, when that crazy nut suddenly started shooting?"
The Mother was silent.  She bit her nails.  What else had she been remiss in or neglectful of tonight?   In what thousands of other ways was she responsible for the Victim's death?
A policewoman brought them another cup of coffee, in corrugated disposable cups.  She told them that the interrogation of the Witness was completed.  Perhaps the Mother and the Spouse would like to have a word with her as well?  The policewoman looked at them questioningly.  She was small and slim, but there was also something tough about her.  Not a woman who'd allow her child to be shot dead just like that.  You could tell she'd be the type to throw herself bodily in front of any approaching danger.  Like some kind of Superwoman.  The bullets would bounce off her chest.
"Yes!  Yes! Of course we want to have a word with her!"  Distraught and dishevelled, the Spouse got to his feet.
"Who?" asked the Mother.
"That... that little slut!  Who just stood there, while..."
Superwoman seemed to swell a little.  She said in a warning tone, "The girl is extremely upset.  I won't let you speak with her if you can't be reasonable."
The Mother said, "Actually, I wouldn't mind a hot dog first."  The reasonableness of this request gave her some modest satisfaction.
"With mustard?" asked Superwoman.  "On a roll?"
"With chips," decided the Mother.  Really, she'd never been so hungry in all her life.
"Bon appétit," said Superwoman.  With a flourish she drew a plate out of the air, heaped with hot dogs and chips, and handed it to the Mother.
The Spouse knocked it out of her hand.  "Say something!  Don't you want to talk to that Sanne girl too?"
"Sanne?"  She blinked.  "Yes, yes of course."
"Sanne's father is also here," said Superwoman stiffly to the Spouse.  "I advise you to keep your calm."

A door was flung open.
Already she had her arms open wide.   But instead of Jem, the bare room held only the girl in whose company he had gone to meet his unhappy fate.  Her father was standing behind her with his hands resting on her shoulders, a small, portly man, his face twisted with shock.  He opened his mouth and closed it again.  Then he looked down at his feet.
The Mother sat down on the first chair within reach, equally incapable of speech.  The Spouse remained standing.  Superwoman settled herself on a stool by the door.  Her attitude implied, I hear nothing, I see nothing, I say nothing.  But her eyes were wary.
Somebody had wrapped a blanket around the Witness.  Her red hair was plastered to her skull.  Her cheeks showed pink traces of tears.  Her fingers plucked at the hem of her dress, and from time to time she shivered so vehemently that her whole body shook.
Looking at her, the Mother suddenly felt herself grow incredibly clear-headed, as if her consciousness were straining to make room for the realization that this little face must have been the very last thing her son had seen before he lost his life.  It filled her with a monstrous, spitting envy.  "Is that his blood?" she asked, nodding at the tracks on her cheeks.  What she was thinking was, If so, it's my blood.
The Witness turned her gaze on her, dull and skittish at once.  "It sprayed all over the place," she said, nearly inaudibly.  "We were dancing, and then..."  She began to cry.
"She's only fifteen," muttered the girl's father.  "How is she ever going to get over this?"
"There is Victims' Support," said the Mother on auto-pilot.  She had used that line so often that she could recite the telephone number for you with her eyes closed.
"Sure, for the living," snarled the Spouse.
The girl's father said hastily, "We are so terribly sorry for your loss.  What a tragedy.  I simply don't know what to say.  I..."
"Why didn't you stop him?" the Spouse interrupted him in a tight voice.  "Why didn't you do something?"
"Surely you don't mean that!  Sanne can't help it if..."
"Oh no?  Jem wasn't the type of kid who plays the hero!  He let her egg him on!"
The Witness cringed.  "Someone suddenly started shooting," she stuttered.  "Just like that.  The music was so loud, nobody noticed, and you couldn't see very well either, the light show, the crush.  We didn't know anything was up at first, but all of a sudden he was standing next to us, like this."  She raised her arm in the air and pulled an imaginary trigger.
"So he was shooting at the ceiling?" asked the Spouse.  "At the ceiling?  Not at people?"
"Yes, in the air, and Jem said something to him, Jem said something, I couldn't hear what he said, and next thing I knew..."  She burst into tears again.
"...Jem got it between the eyes?"
"But what did Jem say?" the Mother cried.  She clenched her hands together.
"I couldn't hear it!"
Superwoman got up from her stool.  Calmly she said, "The music was loud.  You know how it is, in a club."
"No we don't know!" said the Spouse.  "Godalmighty!  And what's the story, anyway, don't they check for weapons, at the door? 
"There's no anticipating an event like this one, Mr. Vermeer."
"No, you'd rather be handing out parking tickets, wouldn't you!"
Superwoman sent the Mother a meaningful glance: If your husband keeps this up, we'll have to end this conversation.
But she was barking up the wrong tree in appealing to the Mother.  As far as she was concerned, every word the Spouse uttered was true, relevant and carefully chosen.  She grabbed his sleeve.  He was her champion.  She felt his hand slide around hers, as feverish as a glowing ember.  Strengthened by this, she said, "Something like this doesn't just happen out of the blue, surely?  You can see it coming, can't you?"
The Witness jumped up so abruptly that the blanket fell from her shoulders and her bloodstained dress was revealed.  "We were just dancing, nothing was going on, nobody was fighting or anything, it was..."
"But then pray tell," said the Mother, "why was it so impoprtant to drag Jem to a club?"
"I propose," said Superwoman, getting to her feet, "that we leave it at that."
"He asked me!" screamed the Witness, her head jutting forward.
Her father, behind her, grabbed her around the waist and pulled her close.  "We're going.  Come on darling, we're going home."
The hatred that welled up in the Mother was so intense that she felt her hair and nails shrivel up:  her arms would remain empty, she would be going home without a child.
The Spouse shouted, "You'll be hearing from our lawyer!"
Superwoman shut the door behind the Witness and her father.  Her eyes were fixed on the floor.  "Do you have any more questions?"
The Mother couldn't think of anything to say for a long time.
The Spouse finally remarked, as if a completely new thought had just occurred to him, "And the culprit?  You have caught the culprit, haven't you?"
"We are looking for him now.  Dozens of witnesses saw him.  He got away in all the confusion, but rest assured: we will have him in custody within the next twenty-four hours."
The Spouse kicked at a chair.
"You may get want to get some counselling, from Social Services," said Superwoman.  "And would you like to be driven home, or would you rather make your own way?"
"We'll walk," said the Mother, snatching at a last hope, that by leaving this place, she might cancel out everything that had happened.
They walked back through the labyrinth.  It was quieter in the corridors than before, as if all the people behind the closed doors fell silent as they passed by.  There wasn't any sound of voices or footsteps.  A young officer sat dozing behind the counter in the front hall.
Outside it was even quieter.  The trams and cars had long stopped running.  The Spouse said, "It's safest in town after four a.m.   That's what Jem told me."n
The Mother asked herself how her son had known that, and what other notions he'd had which she would now never get to hear about.   She took a deep breath to ward off a dizzy spell.  You could smell the approaching autumn, the very first season that would now have to manage without Jem, without his hollowed-out pumpkins, his pockets filled with chestnuts, his mushroom obsession.  How were the trees supposed to know it was time to let go of their leaves, now that he wasn't there with his red cheeks to rake them up?  How would the hedgehogs know it was time to hibernate?
Behind her she heard the Spouse keening softly to himself.  But she had no room for his grief, she was crammed up to here with her own.  She rushed on blindly.  She was trying as hard as she could to walk away from this terrible moment, to leave it behind, but it was wrapped around her ankle like a stubborn piece of elastic and she was dragging it along, all the way home, where Jem's baseball cap hung on the coat-rack, next to his Salty Dog jacket with the broken zipper which she had promised to replace weeks ago.

And from that moment on, the minutes stopped being minutes, they lasted for centuries, and because of that an hour now covered a time span that was longer than the entire history of the world.  The only thing you could concentrate on was getting through the seconds, those tedious, sluggish moments which time doled out once every so many years.  Once you had completed one second, you'd start grimly on the next.  The hands of the clock were the bars of your prison cell.  They gave you no chance to escape.  The things that were unbearable would therefore remain so forever, for how could time heal anything, if time itself was sabotaging the whole affair?
Franka's women friends came and paid their respects with their casseroles.  With strained faces they too waded through the syrupy sea of senseless time, while seeing to the countless futile transactions that life does, after all, insist on.   Pooling their strength, they just about kept the world turning.
The Spouse meanwhile was on a mission of his own.  He threw himself into the hunt for the gunman.  He went to the club, he interrogated the staff, he posted himself at the door and until late at night he waylaid everyone trying to enter with the question, had they been present at the shooting?  He took down names and phone numbers and spent hours at the police station, where he raged at the detectives.
"It gives him something to do," said the friends indulgently.  "Just let him be."
She, however, thought he ought to have something else to do.  He ought to be with her and do his mourning here, at home, with her, at the very bottom of stagnant time.  He ought to be helping her keep the memory of Jem alive.  Jem, whose undamaged face she was having a hard time recollecting.  Who or what the perpetrator was, left her as cold as Siberia.  Knowing wouldn't revoke Jem's death, no matter what.



--------


#fred_daguiar#

NAMING THE DEAD
Extract from a novel

I want my green fingers back, bring back, bring back, not these stumps. Touched a seed, tucked it in shallow, muddy ground and it sprouted. Fingers found plants and tried to unlock their remedies. My hands trembled with a heartbeat in every finger. I mapped the flora around El Dorado. If a plant brushed my leg as I hurried from one chore to another &#8212; wash this, scrub that, patch such and such with thimble and needle and not much thread or cook something up from nothing &#8212; I stooped beside it and scooped some leaves or twigs off it, apologized for the theft and stashed the prize in my apron pocket for study later. Of course later never came so as I stirred a pot I examined leaf and stem, sniffed the trace of balm, tipped my tongue at it for a tittle-tattle taste of paradise. A speck of paradise on my tongue-tip in the green heart of this jungle. If not paradise then what, a burnt tongue from that unknown sap, a rash on my tongue for tickling my curiosity. Because, because, because I cannot help myself. My mother told me to, not to. I held onto the hem of her dress and what she did I told myself I would do, so yes, she told me to, not to. To speak only when spoken to. Not to whistle, only men whistled. To keep an eye, not the spare eye in the back of my head, that was for danger, but one of my two lazy eyes on my body as I girlied myself about the world so that I would always see how I looked to strange eyes, eyes not mine, how much of my skirt was above my knee, how little was left to ride up my thighs.
I died in the jungle, a stone's throw from El Dorado, in the middle of nowhere. I did not die alone but surrounded by the sounds of all the others, many, many others, dying around me, with me, for me, because of me. They died for me just as I died for them and because of them. I left their bodies scattered and heaped all over Smithtown, the small town we raised in his name. I died on my feet. I walked backwards away from that place knowing nothing, not when I spun on my heels to face the right way out of there nor with any feeling for how I walked through jungle that must have tripped and bumped me along, until I came to a river as wide as the sea. 
The high tide striated the river, made it resemble bundles of light, falling through bamboo. Light in layers or a ladder, water for rungs, wrung water, water's twisted cloth, bolts of cloth, stacked, tiered, heaped water. It looked so that I could walk on it, climb it and escape the jungle and end up high in the highest current of the water. Buoyed away by pure swaths of light disguised as a high tide. A raft of bones built for light travel. And that was how I walked into the river and walked under it too and had to be plucked out by fishermen who took me for a madwoman because I chuckled or choked or both. Three of them held me down and tied me in one of their nets for fear I might scratch or bite. But I was not laughing. I merely chuckled at the fact that the water deceived me, like everything else about our jungle paradise and made me think I could climb it to some other safer place. My chuckle of recognition, acknowledged an inviolable fact. I was the water but the water was not me. I was the forest but the forest would always remain the forest and have nothing to do with me. I was not in paradise though something of paradise remained hidden in me. Certainly not a laugh as the fishermen thought. 
When was it I last laughed? I mean really guffawed until my midriff hurt and I cried? There in the jungle washed by star, moon and insect-light. In Smithtown dropped in the middle of the world's biggest garden. The meeting began late at night as usual - Smith was a night owl, a late riser who seemed afraid to fall asleep. We sat on aluminum folding chairs arranged in two tight rows of ten, twenty rows deep with a corridor between the two sets of rows. Others, mostly children, squatted on tarpaulin or a spare blanket around the edges of the rows of chairs. All of us faced a plinth covered with cloth and furnished minimally with a small round table on which rested a jug of water, a couple of glasses and Smith's much-thumbed, dog-eared bible, and next to the table, a high chair. Smith sat in the high-backed chair and looked too small for it, rather than the grand royalty he meant to simulate. He held a microphone with the stand beside him in case he needed to rest the mike and dry his face and take a drink. Mostly there was someone nearby to take the mike and hand him a towel or glass of water. A large fan placed strategically behind him and slightly to the side kept him cool and guaranteed the front rows of the tent would be filled early to garner some of that free air. Bare bulbs burned on long cords strung throughout the corrugated zinc-roofed structure open to the elements on all sides. A generator drowned the insect noises and competed with the arguments of Tom Smith booming on the P.A. As stars played hide and seek behind clouds, fireflies flicked their lamps on and off. As the P.A. blasted the dark the multitude of night insects going about their business must have taken in a little of what Smith said. Insect-brethren. 
He ran his hand through his black hair lifting it off his forehead and slicking the thick, wet mop of it back onto his scalp. He fixed his hard brown eyes on a child seated on the floor with her two siblings and made her squirm. His stare was not vacant but the kind of stare that provided thinking with a framework. He asked her what she thought of her parents who were back in California and agitating to get her, her brother and her sister out of Smithtown. The parents hired lawyers and sent several writs to Georgetown ordering Smith to surrender the three children to the authorities. She was a feisty little thing. I nearly slapped her once as was the habit among adults in their dealings with children at Smithtown, for countermanding my instructions during gardening duty. I kept my arm by my side determined not to be like all the rest. I liked Gina's pluck. Though very thin and short she never failed to hoist up on tiptoe and stick her face into the faces of other children who threatened her. And she willingly gathered plants for me helped by her brother Ben and her sister Clara. Though she was in the middle of them and smallest of the three she ordered both of them around as if she were the eldest. Her sense of herself as the best defender of the family in the absence of her parents persisted though she knew every adult in the Temple was meant to be her new family. 
I told her and her brother and sister Anancy the Spiderman stories, as they were told to me by my father, and as I remembered them or failed to in which case I simply made up the lost details. I storied them to keep them at their chores and by my side and therefore out of trouble. They, in turn, went on leaf hunting missions for me and brought back stacks of leaves, most known to me but sometimes a few mysteries turned up. Gina - we used first names, knowing that our last name had to be Smith - took the mike from Tom and barked into it so loudly we sat upright and attended her as if freshened by her appearance when, in fact, each of us was near collapse from working all day and listening to him into the small hours. She seemed about 9 or 10. I say this because exact ages were anathema in Smithtown, gauged roughly by cosmic events or shared calamities with all birth certificates and such proof of citizenship of our former lives burned, shredded or surrendered to Smith and never seen again. I know she had not had her first period and she was spared for this reason from the more arduous chores of womanhood. She held the mike with her right hand and jammed the knuckles of her left hand into her hip. She said about her former parents, "I want to tear them apart, the fuckers. The fucking no-good stirrers. I want to string them up by their fucking heels. Excuse my language, Father," (he nodded for her to proceed), "but I hate those two bitches. They can kiss my ass." She flicked up her dress. She wore nothing under her dress. Her bold gesture brought renewed waves of laughter. "I hope they rot in hell. If they came to get me I would kill them first and then kill myself."
This is where I laughed my loudest. I do not include when I first heard him preach back in California. I cried back then more than I laughed, though it was for joy. This Guyanese jungle setting never rang with so much laughter. If our laughter could harvest fruit the trees would be stripped bare. If our ululating were a season, say the winters back home in the North, then all the land would be covered in snow. I cried with laughter. Everyone howled and clapped and stamped their feet and so the ovation went on long after Gina returned the mike to Tom and resumed her place on the floor next to Ben and Clara. 
Tom Smith called her back to the stage to take a bow and he kissed her on both cheeks and told us she was a child but she should be seen as an example by all of what it takes to be a member of this community and one of his followers. 
It takes balls, he said, pointing with the mike at little Gina. And it took a child to show us the kind of balls we need to survive in this place and against all our enemies. My laughter would have subsided were it not for this addendum of Smith's &#8212; Someone get this child a pair of panties. 
This was the last time I really laughed. I am ashamed because I know I laughed for all the wrong reasons. Even as I laughed I knew what should really take the place of laughter I could never show, not in my body. My body could not contain it. I do not mean straightforward tears but a giving over of the body to despair from which there would be no turning back. 
In Smithtown no one was allowed to cry without the express permission of Smith. Tears at a funeral, fitting. Tears of joy at the height of his sermons, great. Tears of depression or frustration with camp life, not if you valued your skin. I buried my tears face down in my pillow. Look at us in the night and you might wonder why so many of us spent long periods with our faces pressed into the pillow. I am sure I was not the only one who said into my pillow what could never be uttered within earshot of another person and cried and screamed too. 
Smith stood while he made Gina sit on his throne. He picked up where she left off with warnings about insiders who were now outsiders and perhaps more of a threat than any other person, lawyer or government. He defined those persons as most despicable of all Temple enemies. They knew better and turned their backs on wisdom. They learned all there was to know about the beast and opted to support him and work against the Temple. Gina began to nod off on the throne so the nurse shook her and made her re-join her brother and sister in the audience. Smith slumped into the chair and defined lawyers as bloodsuckers, tapeworms, parasites. His speech slurred and he paused for a long time between sentences. He repeated himself and did not seem to know he had said that thing only a moment ago. He repeated it almost verbatim and dwelled on each phrase with the same sense of discovery and revelation. 
"A government walks in on us and pretends it cares about us, about how we live but it is here to spy on us, to criticize us, everyone can criticize, and to destroy us. But we will not go away. You hear, that, ears in the night, eyes in the night. A government walks in on us and pretends, pretends it cares. About us. Cares about how we live but it is here to spy on us, to criticize us, everyone can do that, criticize, and it wants to destroy us. But will we go away? No. You hear that, ears on the night, eyes in the ears of the night." He stopped talking and his head drooped until his chin touched his chest and we knew the night was over because he was over for the night. Sleep for him was death in life, hell on earth, his worst tormentors given free reign with him. So he kept his eyes open and kept us up with him until he had to be carried sleeping in his chair to his bed. 
Four men shouldered that throne with Smith slumped in it, followed by the nurse and hygienist, both of whom tucked him in. We sat and watched the chair with its precious cargo leave the tent. Only after he was out of sight we moved, scuttled to various sleeping quarters counting on the fingers of one hand how very few hours of darkness remained, how late into the night he talked, so late it was well into the start of another day, and hating the idea of waking before we reached our beds.  
We talked about Gina's public outburst for days. It saved her many hours of dull chores and she won a few pairs of decent underwear. Ben and Clara waited on her. That week her name and her brother's and sister's, appeared on the timetable next to mine making me responsible for their personal hygiene. I cut their finger and toe nails, cleaned their ears and combed their hair. I tried to get Gina to deliver a few more nuggets of wisdom but she squirmed and fidgeted like all children subjected to a morning of hair-plaiting and I ended up reprimanding her like all the others. "Keep still, child. How you expect me to tidy your wild head if you keep slipping around like an eel." 
"You hurting me." 
"If I really hurt you child you would know about it." 
To stop myself painting us both into an ugly corner I called her sister and brother over and launched into an Anancy tale. I put aside her night in the spotlight as an aberration. 
She remained feisty even when she approached me for a story. 
"Do you have any Anancy stories for us today?" 
She asked as if I had a store of them on me and it was my duty to give them away before they decomposed because of my neglect and left a bad smell on me.  She seemed to think she did me a favor by providing me with a ready and willing audience at no cost to me and at much inconvenience to her going by her folded arms and frown and the slightest trace of a smirk in the corner of her mouth. She was ripe for a slap and when I felt like dishing out a slap to one so young, a common practice here, I knew it was time to conjure Anancy or send her on one of my leaf gathering errands to add to my plant collection. Everyone soon returned to treating Gina like another pair of hands to help me weed the vegetable and herb garden or help reduce the mountain of laundry, dirty dishes and litter. We could not afford to spare her even in her gifted state, the rare gift of talking in the spirit of Smith. We needed even her little hands in Smithtown, to stave off the rain and humidity, always a fight against ever- encroaching vegetation which moved faster than I could study it, or come to grips with weeds, and mud when it rained, or from overnight moisture, omnipresent mud from more wet than dry days and never enough hands around.
We made mud pies. We could have cooked with mud. It inveigled its way into everything. The children wore a film of muddy water, their second skin. When I scraped Ben, Clara and Gina's scalps, mud speckled their shoulders and lodged between the teeth of the comb. I brushed the comb with every five strokes on a scalp or rattled it in a basin of water. The children screeched and squirmed without exception and I launched a story to settle them. 
I tasted mud too. We salted and peppered it for a flavor other than its mineral promise. The sun baked it and it cracked like the bottom of our feet and the palms of our hands. It squelched when stepped in and grabbed the ankles as if to keep us in it. Patience mud, you will have us all soon enough, so many of us you won't know what to do with us all, where to put us for safekeeping for another day of feasting on us or how to arrange our countless bones other than in a heap. 
The children played in water after a downpour. They stripped bare and flung handfuls of mud at each other. They stopped to catch their breaths only to daub mud on each other and waited around like statues for the mud to dry into a cast on them. Mud people. The mud hardened and resembled ashes. They did not want to crack the mud that encased them so the children walked around straight-legged and with arms stuck out beside them, the ghosts of themselves. 
We caught them and wanted to beat them for it, for playing dead. Did they not know how hard we fought to free ourselves of mud? They knew and yet they did this mud dance to show us that they did not care to fight the mud but preferred to join forces with it. We scrubbed them hard until they were raw skin and polished bones once again. Do not tempt fate, I told Gina, and Clara and Ben, who followed her and did her bidding. You cannot toy with Death. And they looked puzzled. What? They asked. What did we do? You are playing with fire. This confused them no end. What fire? Clearly mud was nothing like fire. 
Gina understood. I threw her my most fierce look, knitted brows, unblinking eyes and pursed lips. She did not do me the honor of looking sheepish like the others. She hardly blinked. I shouted at her more than I reprimanded her two siblings. My look was an order for her to show me a little fear. 
Be respectful of me, Gina, or pay a higher price later on. Cleanliness is next to Godliness. Mud on your body is a sign of a corrupt soul. We fight to remove the taste of mud from our mouths, and what do you do? You roll in it. You show us you do not care. We have to walk away from sin, not invite it into our lives. 
I wanted to say more, throw in a little science about flesh-eating bacteria and fungus but I stopped myself. I had said too much already. I folded my lips in my mouth and bit on them, tightened them against a spigot of tears. For I heard how much I sounded like one of his sermons and we were full of his sermons, three square meals of them a day and every scrap on our plates chewed thoroughly before we swallowed or else, and every plate spotless. Smith fed and full, brimful and near bursting or face Daddy's wrath. 
We needed one example of his iron hand, just one. At one of his marathon evening gatherings Smith asked just about the most elderly man at the Temple, Old John, why he wanted to go to Georgetown. It was long past midnight and we listened in and out of sleeping upright with our eyes open. A few of us held these false poses of attentiveness and leaned unwittingly by degrees until we had to be nudged upright by someone beside us who we fell against or who wished to spare us the embarrassment of having Smith or one of his cohorts shout at us to pay attention.  
The mosquito coils dotted everywhere, burned down to the stubs. Moths whittled away at the light bulbs. But even they began to drift away. When the old man stuttered and said he wanted to see the capital of the country that was his new home before he faced his maker, a few of us nodded. We could understand that, the last wish of an ancient man. Old John seemed older than the hills. No one among us had memories that predated his existence. We were positive Smith would grant it and move on to the next request or case. Old John joined Smith from the beginning.  Some of us even called him Father, a moniker reserved for Smith. Though crooked in body his long years held out the promise of the durable nature of Smith's teachings; that he, Smith, could retain the loyalty of Old John for so long was a measure of the truth of his message. 
But when Smith said to Old John, stooped over with rheumatism and osteoporosis, and who looked up at Smith in a sideways fashion of sticking his chin up, if he would care to tell everyone the real reason why he wanted to go to Georgetown, and not the bullshit excuse of a last rite that might fool some uneducated idiot off the street but was unworthy of an address to his spiritual leader and material provider, a lightning bolt ran through the tent and struck us all to attention. 
The old man stooped even more and dropped his chin. Let us hear you, Smith bellowed. And with that Smith sprang from his seat and thrust the mike into Old John's knobbed hand. "Go on," Smith shouted at the top of his voice to compensate for the lack of a mike. He did not seem angry right then only keen to be heard by everyone. Old John's labored breaths boomed over the P.A. He sighed. The trap could not now be evaded. To deny it would be to call Smith a liar; admit to it and he may as well confess to a cardinal sin, that of desertion. We watched him. He seemed even more contorted than before. As he thought through his options each word played on his crumpled spine in jolts of his body. "I can't hear you," Smith bellowed. This must be what it was like to think for yourself rather than have Smith think for you.   
I try to think outside of his teachings and I come up with a blank, a sky empty of stars, moon, cloud, birds. I draw blank. No Smith, no me. No Father in my head, no head on my shoulders, just a shell for a brain. His words rise up in me and form clouds in my head. Birds sing his praise. Stars paint the sky. I frame them into sentences and I sound like Father, I stick to Smith, his sounds for my no-sound brain: an opalescent sky at night, a cloud city drifting by. Old John said, Yes, sir, Father, I wanted to go to Georgetown but now I want to stay here. I have everything that I need or could ever want right here. Don't need no other place. No, sir. Made a mistake in my thinking. I slipped up. Sorry, Father. 
And with that the old man fell to one knee and lowered his head. Smith jumped off the stage and grabbed the mike from his gnarled hand. 
"You slipped up, did you? What do you think would happen to this place if I slipped up? What do you think would happen to each and everyone of you if I caught a little whimsy to go on a jaunt to Georgetown or some other sin bin and maybe never come back? You know what? I do not have to spell it out for you. Your ruin and my damnation. Your doom on earth and my doom in hell. You can slip up. I, sir, on the other hand, have no such luxury. You know what happens to people who slip, don't you? Do you?" 
"Yes, sir, they fall." 
"That's right, they fall. And you, my oldest friend have fallen from a terrible height." 
Smith beckoned a couple of his helpers over to his side. Two young men of a troop who carry out his physical work, his beatings and lockups, his water immersions and his prolonged verbal assaults for any backsliders, slippers and sliders among us. 
"Take him to the well. You will spend the rest of the night in the well." 
"Please Tom, no." 
"I am Tom now to you, am I? What happened to Father, Daddy? Take him away. I hope the water will mend your ways." 
Smith's two lieutenants frog-marched Old John from the tent. His wife, Jemima, a woman even older than his mid-80s who always hummed hymns while she worked, fainted, and a few women gathered her up and carried her from Congregation Hall as our meeting place was gloriously known. It took a minute of Smith shouting at us to pay attention to him and not to the wayfarers in our midst as he referred to Old John and his wife, Jemima, for Smith to get us to settle and shake off our involuntary shivers. 
His judgment on the old man made my flesh creep and crawl. I belonged to Smith, we all did, and this was what he chose to do with us, his children. An army of ants burrowed just below the surface of my skin. I heard nothing for the rest of that night though Smith shouted at us and locked eyes with me more than once. I slept with my eyes wide open. I looked awake, open and receptive to Smith, but I had shut down all engines in my body, closed all my pores to the world. 
My head summoned the catalogue of my plants and a clump of purple-headed lupins poised on a rock revolved in my mind's eye and I sniffed and stroked and peered at it under an imaginary microscope and lifted a sample of it with tweezers and held it to a bright bulb, any and everything to take my mind off Smith. I placed Anancy in the country's army, pictured him as a thief, disguised him as a rabbit, fixed him in a pose as the North Star, each leg a ray of light shot from the body of the star, or Anancy caught in a lie and shamed in front of the entire village, or at a banquet and eating humble pie.  Plant and Anancy, save me. 
My neighbors on both sides of me shook me by the shoulder and nudged my lolloping head until I jumped out of my seat. They carried Smith out and I could still hear him sermonizing which could only mean I replayed an earlier session of his to compensate for my absence from his current one. I filed out with the rest of the congregation and we tried not to talk about the old man in the well. We kept our mouths shut since it was impossible to know who to trust. Any show of sympathy for him might be reported as opposition to the judgment of Smith and no one opposed Smith, not within the confines of the camp. I took to my bed but lay in the dark and listened to my breathing and the twists and turns of others settling in for the few hours of grace left before morning. These hours flew by ordinarily. Before we knew it daylight was shaking us in our bed to abandon the Devil, idleness, and rise and shine in the name of the Lord. And so they found me, the chacalaka birds or bush alarm clocks of our settlement, those allotted day-duty, the enforcers who made sure all the beds were vacated by everyone but the infirm, my eyes wide open and still in need of a shake to stir me from my stupor. A handful of mint leaves in my hand, squeezed for their perfume and then kept in my grip through the small hours, the quiet, and then start of dawn life, gripped all night to remind me of something that was still mine. 
A part of me held the hand of Old John as they lowered him into the well and the rest of me kept him company throughout the long night of damp bones and cold cramps. I told him Anancy stories and he corrected my mistakes and I named the plants that might ease the stiffness in his back and slow down the brittleness of his bones, the flesh folding with them. We talked and cuddled for warmth and in the dark watched each other for the shine in our eyes. And when they pulled him up in the morning and he looked fast asleep and no one could rouse him from his slumber that was because his cold skin and stiff bones told another story for he and I floated down that well and rather than soak all night and freeze we found a portal and squeezed through it and out of this place.  


--------


iman_mersal


IT SEEMS I INHERIT THE DEAD

After I returned with the grown-up strides
from burying my mother,
leaving her to raise her hens in an ‘mysterious' place,
I had to protect the house from the neighbors' spying.
I got used to sitting on the doorstep
waiting for the heroine of the radio soap opera
who was always persecuted.
And on the day my friend got a visa
to test her body on another continent—
though she did not as usual forget
her cigarettes on my table—
I became certain that smoking is a necessity.
I began to have a private drawer
and a secret man
who used to be her old lover.

Also,
when the doctors fail to find a kidney
that Osama's body will not reject—
Osama
whose kidneys frayed
because he repressed his bitterness to appear elegant—
maybe I'll start using his firmly raised thumb to assert my presence
in conversation…

It seems I inherit the dead.
One day
after the death of all those I love,
I will sit alone in a café
without any sense of loss,
because my body is a huge basket
where all those who leave
drop things 
that bear their traces. 




فاتتني أشياء (Things Elude Me )

أمامَ البيت الذي كان لسنواتٍ بيتي
سأعبرُ يوما
مجرِّبةً ألا أقيسَ منه المسافة َإلى بيوتِ أصدقائي،
أن الأرملةَ البدينةَ التي كثيراً ما أيقظني شبقُها في الليل
 لم تعُد جارتي.

سأبتكر أشياءَ كي لا أرتبك،
 كأن أعدَّ خطواتي
 أو أعضَّ شفتيّ متلذذةً بالوجع الخفيف
 وقد أشغل أصابعي بتمزيق عُلبٍ كاملةٍ
 من المناديل الورقية.

لن أحاولَ اكتشافَ طرقٍ جانبيةٍ
تساعدني على تفادي الألم،
ولن أحرمَ نفسي من التسكِّع في ثقةٍ
وأنا أدرّبُ أسناني على مضغ كراهيةٍ
 تقفز من الداخل.
وفي محاولةٍ للتسامح
مع الأيادي الباردةِ التي دفعتْني اليه 
سأتذكّر
أنني لم أخدش أبيضَ الحمّام
 بدُكنةٍ تخصُّني.

فاتتني أشياء بلا شك،
الجدرانُ - نفسها-  لم تدخل أحلامي
فلم أتخيل لونَ طلاءٍ
 يناسبُ إضاءةً فاجعةً.


هذا البيت، كان لسنواتٍ بيتي
لم يكن معسكراً طلابياً
 حتى أترك فستانَ الحفلاتِ
 على مسمارٍ خلف الباب،
 وألصق صوري القديمةَ بصمغٍ مؤقتٍ.
أظنُّ أن الجُمل العاطفية
التي أخرجتُها من "الحُب في زمن الكوليرا"
قد اختلطت هناك
أصبحت نصاً بالغَ الكوميديا.




THINGS ELUDE ME

One day I will pass in front of the house 
that was mine for years
and try not to measure how far it is from my friends' homes.

The plump widow whose cries for love woke me
is not my neighbor any more.

I'll invent things so not to get confused.
Count my steps
or bite my lower lip savoring the slight pain
or keep my fingers busy with tearing a whole packet
of paper tissues.

I will not try short cuts
to avoid the pain.
I will not stop myself from loitering 
as I train my teeth to chew on hate
that leaps from within.
And to forgive
the cold hands that pushed me toward it,
I will remember
that I did not smudge the bathroom's whiteness
with my own darkness.

No doubt, things elude me.
The wall itself did not enter my dreams.
I did not imagine a color paint 
to match the scene's tragic lighting.

This house was my home for years.
It wasn't a student hostel
where I would leave an evening gown
on a nail behind the door
or paste old pictures with temporary glue.
The romantic sentences 
I extracted from Love in the Time of Cholera
must be jumbled up now
making an altogether comic text.




الجَلْطة (The Clot)

إلى أبي

مجرّد نوم
يزمُّ شفتيه على غضبٍ
لم يعُد يذكر سببَه
ينامُ عميقاً
الكفّان تسندان الرأس
فيُشبه جنود الأمن المركزيّ،
في عربات آخر الليل
حين يغمضون الأعينَ على رُكامٍ من الصُّوَر
تاركينَ الروحَ للدورانِ المنتظِم
ليصيروا ملائكةً فجأة.

رسمُ القلب
كان يجب أن أصيرَ طبيبة
لأُتابع رسمَ القلبِ بعينيّ
وأؤكدَ ان الجَلْطة مجردُ سحابة،
ستنفكُّ إلى دموع عادية،
إذا توفر قليلٌ من الدفء
لكني لستُ نافعةً لأحد
والأبُ العاجز عن النوم خارجَ سريره الشخصيّ
ينامُ عميقاً، فوق طاولةٍ
في بهوٍ واسع.

صراخ
نساءٌ صامتات
مَلأن الطُّرقةَ التي تؤدّي إليك
وجهّزْن الأجسادَ لطقسٍ
سيزيح الصدأَ المتراكمَ فوق حناجرَ
لا تُجرِّب نفسها
إلا في الصراخ الجماعيّ.

هذا جيّدٌ

أكتافُ المتطوعين
حملتْ رجلاً من السرير المجاور
إلى المقابر العمومية.
هذا جيّدٌ لأجلِك
لا يُمكن أن يكرّر الموتُ فِعلتَه
في نفس الغرفة، في مساءٍ واحد.

بورتريه

لم يكن قلبُه المرهونُ بخطوتي كافياً
سوى لتذكره كرائحةٍٍٍ حميمةٍ وعطنة،
ربما كان يكره بناطيلي الصيفية
والشِّعرَ الخالي من الموسيقى
ولكني ضبطته أكثرَ من مرّة
يَدوخ في ضجّة أصدقائي
وينتشي من الدخان
الذي يتركونه خلفهم.

تشابُه
من أجل أن أشتري "الشَّعرَ المُترجم"
أقنعني هذا النائمُ عميقاً
أن خاتمَ زواجه يُحدِثُ ضغطاً على بِنصرهِ
وظلَّ مبتسماً ونحن نغادِر حيّ الصاغة،
بينما أنا أخبره برفضي للتشابه
بين أنفِه وأنفي.

أتلقَّى موتَك
سأتلقَّى موتَك
على أنه آخر ما فعلتَه ضدّي
ولن أشعرَ بالراحة كما كنتُ أظن،
وسأصدّق تماماً
أنكَ حرمتَني فرصةَ كشْفِ الأورام
التي تنامت بيننا
وفي الصباح
قد أُفاجأ بتورُّم جفوني
وبأن التقوّس في ظهري 
قد ازداد حدّة.

بيت المرايا
سنذهب معاً إلى مدينة الملاهي
وندخلُ بيتَ المرايا
لترى نفسَكَ أطولَ من نخلة أبيك
وتراني بجانبك قصيرةً ومحدَّبة.
سنضحك كثيراً بلا شك
وستمتدُّ الرحمةُ بيننا
وسيعرف كُلٌّ منا،
أن الآخر يحمل فوق ظهرِه
طفولةً حُرِمت من الذهاب
إلى مدينة الملاهي.

زيارات
الميِّتةُ أُمي تزورني في الأحلام كثيراً
أحياناً تنظف لي أنفي ممّا تظنه تراباً مدرسياً،
وأحياناً تعقصُ شَعري،
بقسوة كفين مدرَّبتين على تضفيرِ طفلة،
دون أن تنتبه
للمقصَّات التي مارستْ سُلطَتها عليه
ولا لأطرافهِ المجزوزةِ في حدّة.

أنتَ أيضاً،
قد تُثبِّت الدنيا عند لحظة موتك،
وسيكون لديّ الوقتُ
لأُنبِّهك.


لمرّاتٍ عديدة
لمرّاتٍ عديدة
يدخلُ الطبيبُ إلى بيتنا فيقول:
تأخّرتم كثيراً.
من أجل هذا
أطمسُ التاريخَ الطبيّ لأحبابٍ
لا يُدفَنون حين يموتون
وأُقنعُ نوافذَ غرفتي
لحظةَ أُغلقها بإحكامٍ
أن لديّ حداداً يخُصُّني
حين تندلع موسيقى أفراحٍ مجاورة.

فَقَدْتَ الحِكمة
أضمُّ شَعري للخلف
حتى أُشبهَ بنتاً أحببتَها من قديم،
ولأعوامٍ،
أغسلُ فمي من بيرة أصدقائي
قبل الرجوع للبيت،
كما أني لا أصف اللهَ في حضورِك.
ليس هناك ما يستحق غفرانَكَ إذن،
أنتَ طيّبٌ، ولكنكَ فقدْتَ الحكمة
حين جعلتَني أُصدّقُ أن الدنيا مثل مَدْرسة البنات
وأنني يجب أن أزيحَ رغباتي
لأظلَّ أَلْفَةَ الفصل.


في حياد
سأُفرِغُ يديَّ من الأكاذيبِ المسكِّنَة
وأحرقُ أمام عينيه
الصلصالَ الذي أُشكِّلهُ على مقاس أحلامه.
هو..
سيشير إلى الجانب الأيسر من صدرهِ
وأنا..
سأوميء برأسي في حياد المُمرِّضات
يجب أن يُصدِّق،
قبل أن تنتهي غيبوبةُ التاجيّ
أن رغبته في الموت
لن تُخفي تشققات الاُسرة.

خانات
عادةً ما تكون النوافذُ رماديّة،
وجليلة في اتساعها،
بما يسمح للموجودين داخل الأَسِرَّة
بتأمُّل سير المرور،
وأحوالِ الطقس خارجَ المبنى.

عادةً ما يكون للأطبّاء أنوفٌ حادّةٌ،
ونظاراتٌ زجاجيّةٌ،
تثبت المسافة بينهم وبين الألم.

عادةً ما يتركُ الأقاربُ
وروداً على مداخِل الحُجرات
طالبين الصفحَ من موتاهُم القادمين.

عادةً ما تمرُّ سيداتٌ على
مُربّعات البلاط بلا زينة،
ويقف أبناءٌ تحت مصابيح الكهرباء
مُحتضنينَ ملفَّات الأشعّة،
ومؤكدين أن تمرير القسوة مُمكنٌ
إذا تَوَفّر لآبائهم بعضُ الوقت.

عادةً كل شيئ يتكرر
والخانات مملوءةٌ بأجسادٍ جديدة
كأن رئةً مثقوبةً تشفط أكسجينَ الدُنيا
تاركةً كلَّ هذه الصدور
لضيقِ التنفُّس. 



قد لا يحدُث
قد لا يحدُث
أن آخذ أبي في آخر العام إلى البحر
لهذا
سأعلِّق في مقابل سريرِه
صورةَ مصطافين،
وشطوطاً ممتدّة لجهاتٍ لا أعلمها.
قد لا يحدُث أن يراها
لهذا
سأكتُم صوت تنفُّسي
وأنا أُبلِّل أطرافَ أصابِعه بمياهٍ مالحة،
وسأُصدِّق بعد سنواتٍ
أنني سمعتُهُ يقول:
"أشمُّ رائحةَ اليود"




THE CLOT
For my father

Simply Sleeping

He bits his lips holding back 
an anger he cannot recall.
He sleeps deeply,
the hands holding his head up
make him look like the soldiers
dozing in midnight trucks
as they shut their eyelids
on crowds of images,
letting their souls spin
until they suddenly turn into angels.

EKG

I should have become a doctor
so that I can track the EKG
with my own eyes,
and confirm that the clot
was a mere cloud
that would break into normal tears
when enough warmth is given.
But I am useful to no one
and my father who cannot sleep in his own bed
now sleeps deeply on a stretcher
in a wide hall.

Screams

Silent women
filled the corridor leading to you.
They prepared for a ritual
to scrape rust
piled on throats
that can only test their range
in collective screaming.

That's Good

Volunteers' shoulders
carried the man from the next bed
to the public graveyard.

That's good for you.

Death cannot repeat its deed
in the same room,
on the same night.

Portrait

With his heartattuned to every step I took,
he can be remembered now
only as an familiar, musty smell.
Maybe he hated my summer shorts,
and my poetry that is empty of music.
But I caught him more than once
dizzy in the ruckus my friends made,
elated in the smoke
they left behind.

Resemblance

To help me buy Poetry in Translation
this deep sleeper convinced me
that his wedding band constricts his finger.
He continued smiling as we left the jeweler's
and as I told him
his nose looks nothing like mine.

News of Your Death

I will receive your death
as the last wrong you commit against me.
I will not feel relief as I had thought
and I will firmly believe
that you have denied me the chance
to diagnose the tumors
that have grown between us.
In the morning
I may be surprised by my puffed eyelids
and how my shoulders have sagged
even lower.

House of Mirrors

We will go together
to the amusement park
and enter the house of mirrors.
You will see yourself taller
than your father's date palm
and I will stand beside you
misshapen and dwarfed.
No doubt, we'll laugh a lot
and mercy will spread between us.
Each of us will know
we carry on our backs
a childhood without
amusement parks.

Visits

My dead mother visits me
frequently in dreams.
Sometimes she cleans my nose
of  what she believes is schoolyard dust.
Other times she holds my head
with the exactness of hands
used to braiding a girl's hair, ignoring
the scissors that brutalized my hair
and its chopped edges.

You too
may transfix the world at the moment of your death.
And I will have enough time 
to warn you.

Many Times

Many times
the doctor enters our house and says,
"You called too late."
Because of this
I will erase the medical records
of my loved ones who are not buried
when they die.
I will convince
the windows in my room
as I shut them tightly
that I have a private mourning to tend to
while the music of nearby celebrations
blares.

You Have Lost Sense

I tie my hairback
to look like a girl you once loved.
And for years,
I wash my mouth off beer
before returning home.
I never mention God in your presence.
There's nothing that deserves your forgiveness.
You are kind, but you must have lost sense
when you made me believe
the world is like a girls' school
and I would have to set aside my desires
to remain the teacher's pet.

In Neutrality

I will wash my hands of numbing lies,
and burn before his eyes
the clay I shaped to fit his dreams.
He
will point to the left side of his chest
and I
will nod with the neutrality of nurses.

He must realize
before the coma ends
that his wish to die
will not fill the cracks within the family.

Wards

Usually the windows are gray
and splendid in their width
allowing the bed-ridden
to view the traffic below
and the weather outside.

Usually the doctors have sharp noses
and eyeglasses
that secure the distance between them and pain.

Usually relatives place
flowers in doorways
seeking forgiveness
from their future dead.

Usually unadorned women
walk the hallway tiles
and sons stand under light fixtures
clutching x-ray sheets
affirming that cruelty can fade
if only their parents had more time.

Usually everything recurs
and the wards are filled with new bodies
as if a punctured lung
is sucking away all the world's oxygen
leaving all these chests
without breath.

Not Likely

It is not likely
that I will take my father to the sea at year's end.
So
I will hang in front of his bed
a poster of beach-goers
and beaches that stretch to places I do not know.
He may not see it at all.
This is why
I will silence the sound of my breathing
as I wet his fingertips with salt water.
And I will believe years later
that I heard him say:
"I smell iodine."

From Walking As Long As Possible, 1997




العتبة (THE  THRESHOLD)

نعم،
بابيونة القائد التي تشبه سهماً يشير إلى جهتين مختلفتين
كانت مرهقة،
ولم نر أصابع العازفين
غير أننا تابعنا خروجهم  واحداً واحداً
وعرفنا أن الشعراء الذين جاءوا مبكراً
قد تحيزوا للناي 
رغم أن حزنه سليم وكامل
وأنهم دخنوا كثيراً بين كل مقطوعتين
كل ذلك لم يهمنا ؛
فقد كنا نريد أن نرى الستارة السوداء في خلفية المسرح.

تأخرنا 
وبالكاد، استطعنا أن نلمح الأكاديميين
وهم يستردون معاطفهم.

لا، في الواقع كان الجو مكتوماً
كأنك في ثكنة عسكرية، مضطر لترديد النشيد الوطني
غير أنها – كما تعلم – تُمطر عادةً في الأفلام الأجنبية.

لم نحزن لانتهاء الحفل
وبدلاً من أن نمد حبل الدراما إلى البر المقابل
عبرنا الكوبري
وألقينا التحية على بائع الطراطير
العائد لتوه من مولد الحسين.

نعم،
تهت عنهم وسط موكب من الجِمال
يخرج من الجامعة العربية
وعندما تجمعنا ثانية
أعطينا الجندي الواقف أمام بناية
 لا يعرف اسمها، بعض سجائرنا
ووصلنا أخيراً إلى بار وسط المدينة
برحابةٍ انسانيةٍ وخدوشٍ متفرقة.

كان علينا أن نجلس هناك أربع سنوات
فقرأنا سمير أمين
وحاولنا تمصير هنري ميلر
أما كونديرا، فقد غيّر تبريراتنا للخيانة.


واستلمنا هناك،
رسالة من صديقٍ يعيش في باريس
يخبرنا أنه اكتشف داخله
شخصاً آخر لم يتعود عليه
وأنه- يومياً – يجر تعاسته خلفه
على أرصفةٍ أكثر نعومةًً من أرصفة العالم الثالث،
ويتحطم بشكلٍ أفضل
فحقدنا عليه عدة شهور
وتمنينا أن يطردونا إلى مدينة أخرى.

لم نرتبك عندما نفدت نقودنا
وبعد دعاءٍ قصيرٍ
انفجر تحت أقدامنا – والله – بئرٌ من البيرة
فمثلنا دور من فقدوا الوعي
وصنفنا قاموساً يخصنا . . من قبيل:
رِوِشْ:
هنيني:
عَوَق:
دناشين: … إلخ

وعندما اقترح أكبرنا سناً أن نصبح إيجابيين
كنتُ أفكر في طريقةٍ
لتحويل الحمّامات العمومية للبكاء
والميادين الكبيرة للتبوّل
لحظتها،
صرخ مثقفٌ مخضرمٌ في صديقه:
(عندما أتحدث عن الديمقراطية، تخرس خالص)
فجرينا ساعةً
وأصبحنا أكثر هدوءاً في شارع المُعزّ
حيث قابلنا شهيداً منزعجاً
وطمأنّاه أنه حيّ . .
ويُمكن أن يسترزق إذا أراد
ثم إنه لم تكن هناك معركةٌ أصلاً.

نعم،
كنا على وشك توطيد علاقتنا بالميتافيزيقا
لولا أن أحدنا كان يداري جمجمته
تحت قبعةٍ فاخرةٍ
فبدونا لهم على هيئة سائحين
حتى أن بائع التوابل سار خلفنا
وهو يردد: والنبي
  stop
              والنبي
wait


لم يبقَ أمامنا غير مقابر"الإمام"
جلسنا فيها سنةً أخرى
نشم رائحة الجوافة
وعندما قررتُ أن أتركهم جميعاً
أن أمشي وحدي
كنت قد بلغت الثلاثين.


من "جغرافيا بديلة" 2006 – القاهرة


From Alternative Geography, 2006



THE  THRESHOLD
Yes,
the maestro's bow tie
like an arrow pointing to opposite directions
was haggard.
We did not see the players' fingers,
but we followed their exit one by one.
We learned that the poets who arrived early
sided with the ney1 even though 
its sadness was genuine and complete,
and that they smoked a lot between pieces.
All that didn't concern us.
We only wanted to see the black curtain 
at the back of the stage.
We were late
and barely caught a glimpse of the academics
as they retrieved their coats.

No, in fact, the atmosphere was suffocating
as if you were in military barracks required to recite the national anthem,
but—as you know—it usually rains a lot in foreign movies.

We weren't sad when the performance ended.
And instead of tossing the rope of melodrama to the opposite shore
we crossed the bridge
and saluted the party-hat seller
who had just returned from the Hussein festival.

Yes,
I lost them in the middle of a parade of camels
emerging from the Arab League.
When we got together again
we gave some of our cigarettes to a soldier 
guarding a building
whose name he did not know.
And at last we arrived at a bar in the city center
with a sense of affability and a few scratches.

We had to sit there for four years so 
we read Samir Amin
and attempted to Egyptianize Henry Miller.
As for Kundera, he changed our justifications for infidelity.

There we received 
a letter from a friend living in Paris
who told us he's discovered in himself a person 
he has yet to get used to.
Everyday he drags his misery
on sidewalks considerably smoother than the Third World's,
and he's being destroyed, but in a better way.
We envied him for months
and hoped they would banish us to another capital.

We did not panic when we ran out of money.
One of us had become a Sufi
and after a short prayer
a spring of beer—I swear to God—gushed below our feet.
So we pretended we were drunk
and made our own dictionary.  For example:
Riwish
Hinini
Awaq
Danashin2… etc

We shouted.
No one understood us.
When the oldest among us suggested we become positive,
I was thinking of a way
to transform the public bathrooms into establishments for weeping
and the squares into facilities for urinating.
At that very moment
a well known intellectual screamed at his friend:
When I'm talking about democracy
		you shut your mouth!

So we ran for an hour
and we became calmer on al-Muezz Street
where we met an agitated martyr.
We assured him he is still alive,
and that if he wants, he can still seek divine sustenance,
and besides, there was no battle to begin with.

Yes,
we were about to affirm our bond
with metaphysics,
but one of us hid his skull
under a splendid hat.
To them we looked so much like tourists that 
a spice peddler followed us
repeating:  	Wilnabi  "Stop"
Wilnabi "Wait"3

There was nothing left but the Imam's cemetery.
We sat there for another year
smelling the scent of guava.
And when I decided to leave them 
and to walk on alone
I had reached thirty.

From Alternative Geography, 2006




غرفة التحرير (The Editorial Room)


مرةً عملتُ محررةً أدبيةً وتحوّلَ العالمُ إلى كتابةٍ يغطيها التراب،
أكوامٌ من الرسائلِ مدموغة بثقةِ الدولةِ في نظامها البريدي
وحيث لا أنتظرُ غير الضجر، كان فَصْلُ الطوابعِ هو العملية الأكثر إثارةً، حيث جفَّ لعابُ كتَّابٍ سيئي الحظ تحتها
الوصولُ اليوميّ إلى غرفة التحرير
كان نوعاً من رَكْنِ الأنا على جنب، 
مثل وضعِ عدسةٍ لاصقةٍ في محلولٍ مُطهّر.
لم تكن هناك غيرُ كآبةٍ أقيسُ بها حجمَ كآبةِ الآخرين
ولم يكن ذلك مناسباً لمجلةٍ تبشّرُ بالغدِ.
غرفةُ التحريرِ لم يكن بها شرفةٌ
ولكن الأدراجَ كانت مليئةً بالمقصّات.




The Editorial Room

Once I worked as an editor in a literary journal and the world became a script 
	covered with dust,
piles of letters stamped with the state's confidence in its postal system.
And where I expected nothing but boredom, peeling stamps became the most 
	exciting thing to do 
as the saliva of unfortunate authors dried.
Arriving at the editorial room every day
was a way to park the self in a corner
like placing a contact lens in saline solution.
There was only depression with which to measure other people's depression.
Clearly this was not appropriate for a journal that looked toward egalitarian future.
The editorial room had no balcony,
but the drawers were full of scissors.


جغرافيا بديلة (Alternative Geography)

لماذا جاءت إلى البلاد الجديدة؟ هذه المومياء؛ موضوع الفُرجة
ترقد بزينتها في كتّانٍ رماديّ: حياةٌ متخيلةٌ في فترينة متحف.
أظن أن التحنيط مسألةٌ ضد الخلود
لأن الجسد لن يكون أبدأً جزءاً من وردة.
المومياء لم تختر هجرتها بينما هؤلاء الذين انتظروا طويلاً في طوابير السفارات، وبنوا بيوتاً في بلادٍ أخرى، 
يحلمون بالعودة عندما يصبحون جثثاً
يجب أن تحملونا إلى هناك
ـ هكذا يتركون الوصايا في أعناق أولادهم ـ
كأن الموت هويةٌ ناقصةٌ
لا تكتمل إلا في مقبرة الأُسرة.

هنا أيضاً أشجارٌ خضراء تقف تحت ضغط الثلج، وأنهارٌ لا يتعانق بجانبها عشاقٌ خلسة، بل يجري بموازاتها رياضيون مع كلابهم في صباح الأحد، دون أن ينتبهوا للمياه التي تجمدت من الوحدة. 
ومهاجرون لم يتدربوا على محبة الطبيعة ولكنّهم يصدّقون أن نسبةَ التلوث أقل، وأن بإمكانهم إطالة أعمارهم بمضغ الأوكسجين قبل النوم عبر كبسولاتٍ هوائية.


لماذا لم ينسوا أنهم من هناك؟
الغرباءُ الفَشَلةُ
يدرّبون عضلات أفواههم على التخلّص من اللكنة، 
اللكنة هي المرض الوراثي الشفّاف الذي يفضحهم، 
يقفز عندما يغضبون فينسون كيف يضعون أحزانهم في لغةٍ أجنبيةٍ
اللكنةُ لا تموت، ولكن الغرباءَ حفارو قبورٍ بجدارة
يعلّقون على باب الثلاجة أسماء من ماتوا من الأهل
حتى لا يخطئوا ويطلبوهم في التليفون.
ويدفعون رُبع أجورهم لشركات الاتصال
ليتأكدوا أنهم موجودون في مكانٍِ يمكن تحديده ببعده عن الطفولة
لماذا لم ينسوا؟



يجب شراء organic food ولكني منذ ساعة أتأمل صورة أمي جالسة على عتبة دار أبيها التي لم تعد هناك ؛ أقصد العتبة، 
رغم أن أمي نفسها لم تعد هناك.
لا أحد يمرّ في الشارع لأن العربات تدخل وتخرج بالريموت كنترول. كنتُ قد اشتريتُ هذا البيت الذي لا يمكنني الجلوس على عتبته من أرملة نحاتٍ أسبانيّ، كان قد بناه على أرضٍِِ تؤول إلى مهاجرٍ أوكرانيّ أعطتها له الحكومة الكنديّة بعد نزعها من الهنود الحُمر ؛ لكي تقيم مدينةً فيها عدة جامعات وعشرات من الشوبنج مول وآلاف مثلي يعرفون الفوائدَ الصحيةَ للأورجانيك فوود ويمتلكون عربات تدخل وتخرج بالريموت كنترول.

في ست خطواتٍ فقط، يكتب المغترب رسالةً ناجحةً إلى الأهلِ:
- يختار لحظةً لا يفتقدهم فيها.
- يجلس وظهره للشارع لأن الحوائط أكثر حيادية.
- يوزّع السلامات بدقة.
- يستحضر المجازات التي تربَّى عليها، المجازات التي ظن أنه
   لن يلمسها يوماً مثل (أحبكم عدد نجوم السماء وعدد حبات 
   الرمال وأشتاق إليكم كما يشتاق العطشان إلى الماء والعليل
   إلى الدواء والغريب إلى الوطن).
- يتفادى ذكر تفاصيله اليومية لأنه لا يعرف كيف سيؤوّلونها.
- يكرّر"الحمد لله" كثيراً حتى يطمئنوا على إيمانه.


 ما تعلّمتَهُ هنا لا يختلف عمّا تعلّمتَهُ هناك:
_  القراءةَ كتذكرةِ مرورٍ إلى تغييبِ الواقع.
_  تخْبِئةَ الخجلِ تحت ألفاظٍ بذيئةٍ.
_  إخفاءَ الضعفِ عبر إطالة الأظافر.
_  تسريبَ الأرق في التدخين دائماً وفي ترتيب الأدراج أحياناً.
_  توفيرَ ثلاثة أنواع من قطرة العيون من أجل توضيح الرؤية ثم
    الاستمتاع بالعمى. والأهم، تلك اللحظة الرائعة من إغماض
    الجفون على حريق.
هنا وهناك
تبدو الحياة وكأنها موجودةٌ فقط لتُراقَب من بعيد.


دقائق وتدخُلك السَّكينةُ التي لا يبحث عنها أحدٌ
فقط اترك رأسَكَ تحت الماء 
كيف؟ الفكرة التي تبرق مثل لؤلؤةٍ في سلة مهملات؟  
كيف تُهدِرُها هكذا؟
إنها فكرتك أنت؛ مختلفةٌ عنك وأصيلةٌ،
هذه الثواني ليست معدودات ؛ إنها النصلُ الفاصلُ بين زمنين
تذكّر الأطباقَ القذرةَ في المطبخ... البريدَ الذي يحمل إعلانات، المصابيحَ التي تسلِّط نفسها في حدقتيك... 
الرحمةُ التي لم تعرف أنك تبحث عنها. معك. ستدخل إلى رئتيك إذا تركتَ جسدَك يهبط، يهبط للقاع... تحت الماءِ ثواني أخرى،
لا حاجة للخوف
الزمن لن يفعل شيئاً على الإطلاق
لن يجعل لشجاعتك ثقلاً يأخذك لأسفل
الزمن ليس مهماً، إنه مجرد زمن.


في قارةٍ أخرى، تركتَ أعداءً مساكين، 
يجب أن تخجل من نفسك عندما تتذكرهم
لا شيء يغضبك الآن، 
من الصعب أن تقابل شيوعياً كلاسيكياً هنا، حتى إنهم يضعون ساعةً في المكاتب العمومية بدلاً من صورة الرئيس.
ربما يكون كابوساً أن تقضي يوماً كهذا تحت تأثير المهدئات.
لا شيء جدير بأن تتمرد عليه. 
أنت مرْضيٌّ وميتٌ
والحياةُ من حولكَ تبدو مثل يدٍٍ رحيمةٍ
أضاءت الغرفةَ لعجوزٍٍ أعمى 
ليتمكّن من قراءة الماضي.



                                            
     WHY DID SHE COME?

Why did she come to the New World, this mummy, this subject of spectacle
sleeping in her full ornament of gray gauze, 
an imaginary life in a museum display case.
I think mummification is contrary to immortality 
because a preserved corpse will never be a part of a rose.
The mummy did not choose migration, but those who waited in long lines at consulates and built houses in other countries
still dream of returning when they become corpses.
- "You have to take us there"
this is what they instruct in wills they hang around their children's necks like 
nooses
as if death is an unfinished identity
that matures only in the family burial plot.

					*


Here too are green trees, standing under the weight of snow, and rivers where lovers do not sneak an embrace. Instead, there are joggers who run along the banks with their dogs on Sunday mornings not noticing the waters that froze from solitude. There are immigrants too who were not trained in loving nature, but who believe there is less pollution here, and that they can prolong their lives by chewing on oxygen capsules before going to bed.

					*

Why can't they not forget that they are from there?
these foreign losers
who train their jaw muscles to rid themselves of their accents,
transparent accents, inherited illnesses that expose them
and that leap out of their mouths when they're angry and forget how to place 
their sadness in a foreign language.

Accents do not die, but foreigners are excellent gravediggers.
They post the names of their dead relatives on their fridges 
so not to call them by mistake.
They pay a quarter of their wages to telephone companies
to make sure they live in a place that can be identified by its distance from 
childhood.
Why did they not forget?

					*


One must buy organic food, but for an hour I have been contemplating a photo 
of my mother
sitting on the doorstep of her father's house, no longer there. I mean the 
doorstep, 
even though my mother too is no longer there.
No one passes by on this street because the cars enter and leave by remote
	control.
I bought this house on whose doorstep I cannot sit, from the widow of a Spanish sculptor who built it on land that belonged to a Ukrainian immigrant given to him by the Canadian government after it was filched from the Indians to build a city with several universities and tens of shopping malls and to house thousands like me who know nothing about the health benefits of organic food and who own cars that enter and leave by remote control.

				*

In six steps the immigrant writes a successful letter to his family:
- He chooses a time when he does not miss them.
- He sits with his back to the window because walls are more neutral.
- He distributes his greetings precisely.
- He recalls clichés he was raised on, ones he thought he would never use: 
"I love you as much as the stars in the sky and the grains of sand on the 
shore. I miss you the way the thirsty long for water, and the ill for 
medicine, and the stranger for his home."
- He avoids mentioning details of his everyday life because he does not know 
how they will interpret them.
- He repeats "Praise be to God" to assure them that he keeps his faith.

				*


What you learn here is not different from what you learned there:
- You read to absent reality.
- You hide your shyness under foul language.
- Camouflage your weakness by lengthening your fingernails.
- Suppress anxiety by smoking all the time and by organizing and 
reorganizing the contents of drawers sometimes.
- Use three kinds of eye drops to clarify vision then enjoy the ensuing 
blindness. Most important is that wondrous moment of closing your 
eyelids as a fire breaks out.
Here and there
life exists only to be watched from a distance.

				*

A few minutes and a calmness that no one else seeks will enter you:
Just leave your head under water.
How? The idea that shines like a pearl in a wastebasket?
Why would you waste it?
It is your idea, different and genuine.
These seconds are not counted, they are a buffer between two kinds of time.
You remember the dirty dishes in the kitchen, the junk mail,
the lights that impose themselves on your eyes.
Mercy, which does not know you seek it, will come along and enter 
your lungs
if you would let your body fall, fall to the bottom, under the water a few more seconds.
No need to worry.
Time will not do a thing.
It will not weigh you with the courage you will need to sink.
Time is not important. Time is only time.

				*

On another continent you left pitiful enemies behind.
You have to feel ashamed of yourself when you remember them.
Nothing angers you now.
It is impossible to meet a classical communist here, and in any case, they hang 
clocks in public offices instead of the President's picture.
Maybe it is a nightmare to spend a day like this under the influence of sedatives.
Nothing here deserves your rebellion.
You are content and dead
and life around you appears like a merciful hand
that lit up a blind old man's room
so that he can read the past.



--------


antara_dev_sen

The Little Magazine is one of South Asia's professionally produced independent print magazine devoted to essays, fiction, poetry, art and criticism. It is the only publication to offer full-length novellas and film and drama scripts, complete with camera and stage directions. The magazine was conceived as a dialogue - a platform which would carry important work in the world languages along with the best of contemporary writing in the South Asian languages. It is not India-specific and addresses a community which is more easily defined in terms of mindspace rather than in purely geographical terms. Our readers have only one common denominator: they are sensitive and are looking for something more than what mainstream publishing can provide them.  

--------


cecile_guilbert

My eyes are barely open and I can already feel the city - highly charged and magnetic - leaping about behind the windowpanes. A harsh light flashes between the slats of the blind, a radiant announcement of a radiant day. And in the slanting outline of the window, a rowdy sun is blazing high in the sky. The cold is enough to take your breath away. 

Yet again, the programme for the day is simple and unalterable : I am going to wander the streets as usual..  interminably... with no particular goal... cross dusty boulevards and avenues... stroll along dirty pavements and shop windows... in the crush of the crowds and the tumult of the traffic...  wherever the fancy of the moment leads me.... in which ever direction my feet carry me, I will wander until dusk... my shirtsleeves and collar blackened with adventure.

The air we breathe, the areas we pass through, the gardens we dawdle in. aren't these the only things that are still free today ?

It is said that the shape of a city changes faster than the heart of a mortal...
Personally, I haven.t seen anything that was beautiful in the past erased.  And my memories are heavier than rocks.
Obviously, the ancient prophecies have almost all come to pass. The tiring world of compulsory incomprehension has gained some more ground. But how does it matter. We know only too well that whatever man can still do to this earth will be done, without our being able to express our disapproval. Society has been unwilling to take the blame for so long now...

Personally, I still love this city. I think I know it well, but that is not true. I rejoice, rather than being unhappy about it, on the numerous occasions when experience belies this pretension. 
Because between the absolute knowledge of the area where I live and where I know every single meter of every single road, every shop front and every building.s entrance, the exact location of the schools and the parking meters, where you can find a letter box and a tobacconist open on Sundays - a knowledge to which you must add the more distant familiarity with other areas, that other habits or vices annex like so many territories that end up constituting the map of the city I think I know ;  so between this global familiarity, that does not signify either lassitude or boredom, and the unknown geography of a foreign city, deflowered for the first time in the drunkenness of surprise, of this insatiably voracious curiosity that overcomes fatigue, by increasing it with what fights it - between these two extremes, for me, lies Paris. A Paris where at every moment I live the rule and its exception ... married bliss and adventure... what I already know and still ignore. 
So, when I decide to purposely lose myself in a totally unknown area, the myth that I have suddenly been parachuted into foreign territory always works. A sleepy corner of the XIIIth resembles a provincial market town with its deserted cafe and small, sad square... another, a bit of a Provencal village, with its siesta drenched winding streets... However, as the distant outline of a monument, the shape and colours of a newspaper kiosk, a metro entrance or a bus, always pop up in the scenery to prevent the illusion from taking over completely, it is only in brief spurts and for sudden dazzling moments that Paris gives me this special feeling of being nowhere, yet somewhere familiar...

*

I am going out of my building now, a black silhouette against a grey background, melting into the pavement that is haunted by a vivid sky - a clear, blue, well-framed rectangle.
At the first crossroads, a chaotic cacophony of metal and insults. Irate passengers on the steps of a bus. Groups of dumbstruck bystanders. Two men have got out of their cars without switching off the engine : chins raised, caruncled Adams apples. They look like two cocks at a fair hurling their insults.
In the moving flesh of the crowded streets, I carefully follow a route of straight lines and curves, as if I were drawing the brand new outlines of an unknown promenade. At certain places real borders divide the city : this happens at the level of the tall gothic buildings where Boulevard Sebastopol melts into these colourful, noisy lands, where the grime is heart warming. Everywhere else is the overwhelming nausea of goods for sale.

Now I am heading towards the Sentier labyrinth, through streets strewn with empty cartons. The covered passages are deserted, their windows black with dust.. Behind them you can make out a whole population of dislocated ghosts, divested of their finery, grimacing their plastic smiles. You can also imagine the coloured efflorescence of gift ribbons, spooled out by the meter, but the shop fronts have long since been colonised by grime and you would be hard pressed to date the catastrophe. 
I wander for a long while in this gloomy maze until my feet carry me off towards the Palais Royal where I decided to indulge in a halt. There, in these other deserted galleries where only my footsteps resound, I savour a different calm as well as the spangles of refracted light on the dead waters of the fountain. the sandy games played by crouching children, the gentle trembling of the lime trees in the enclosed azure.

It is autumn already. The first dead leaves dot the gravel, patiently creating a new gleaming, varnished carpet. I sit down on a chair in the garden to automatically light a cigarette, thinking of this sentence by Degas that says to produce good fruit, we must grow as if on a trellis, spend our whole life there, arms outstretched, open mouthed to assimilate what is happening, what is around us and to live off it...

The wind comes up. The leaves flutter momentarily above the ground then fall again further on, suddenly inert. The sky darkens with the speed of lightning, but I don't want to go home. It is five o'clock ; it is still early.

So I come out on the other side of the garden. Cross the columns of furious vehicles. Let myself glide mechanically along rue Saint Honore where a range of extravagant rubbish glitters... saffron gauze, shades of brown, chocolate undergrowth, moss, chestnut...

I easily remember certain hair colourings for example, because I see it as hair made of varnished walnut, or of oakum, or even of Indian chestnut bark...  Leaning against the glass wall of a bus shelter, I think about another remark Degas made while watching the confused flurry of women in front of the phantasmagoria of shop windows... their long jointed necks, like woodcocks pecking at a toque or a beehive... their pupils suddenly widening at a wild frock coat... the bustle of capes and feathers fluttering from window to window under the golden globes...

That's when I start to follow one without her knowing, just for the pleasure of admiring, at my leisure, the perfect osmosis of her toilette and her body... her legs sheathed in rust coloured silk, ending in sweet shoes with autumn straps... the two little mink pompoms that bounce against the finely shaped brown flannel bust... the purple suede reticule gracefully swinging on her forearm with each little step... I think she reminds me of my mother... my mother whom I loved for her elegance and her perfume... a heavy bouquet of tuberoses that has since disappeared, which she took with her forever to her grave...

Excerpts from Cecile Guilbert's novel Le Musee National (The National Museum) Gallimard




--------

